# The Hemingway effect: How failing to finish a task can have a positive effect on motivation

**Keywords:** Hemingway effect, Achievement motivation, Benefits of failure, Persistence, Zeigarnik effect

This study proposed and examined empirical evidence for the Hemingway effect, which is that motivation to complete a task that a person has previously failed to complete would be higher the closer that person perceives he/she was in finishing that task. In Study 1, 260 undergraduate students were asked to copy newspaper text, but they were interrupted in the process so that the majority failed to complete the task. When their reported motivation to re-engage in the task to complete or continue it was analyzed, the results revealed that those who had fewer remaining text to copy were significantly higher in such motivation compared to those with more text remaining or even those who were able to finish the task – thus, confirming the occurrence of the Hemingway effect. In Study 2, 131 undergraduate students were administered a short writing task that was either structured or unstructured. Again, they were interrupted so that the majority were not able to finish writing. The results revealed that only the participants given the structured task evidenced the Hemingway effect. This finding suggests that a necessary condition for the effect to manifest is being able to adequately gauge what more needs to be done to complete an unfinished task (which the presence of structure facilitated). In sum, the findings of this study indicate that under certain conditions, failure to finish a task can have beneficial effects on motivation to persist and continue the task. Implications for practice – particularly in educational contexts – are discussed.

## 1. Introduction

The inability to complete a task is generally considered a fundamental form of failure. It means that the person who is supposed to complete the task came up short and was not able to fulfil the set standard for completion of the task. The fact that the task remains incomplete connotes a lack or deficiency, not only in the state of the task itself (i.e., because it is unfinished), but also in the person who was unable to complete it. In everyday life, such failures take their place alongside occurrences of success in completing tasks: for example, children fail to finish room tidy up tasks demanded by their parents, office employees fail to prepare a financial report by a given deadline, students fail to solve a problem before the end of a test, and researchers fail to accomplish writing goals they have set for the day. These failures usually have negative consequences, such as getting reprimanded by the parents or by the office manager, getting a poor mark in the test, or feeling disappointed in oneself. 1.1. Proposing and explaining the Hemingway effect

But is there only a negative side to failing to complete a task? In this paper we propose that, under certain conditions, not completing a task can actually enhance people’s motivation to engage in the task – to complete or continue it. We call this positive effect of not completing a task “the Hemingway effect”, after the famous American writer, Ernest Hemingway. Our reason for naming the effect after the writer is that when asked during an interview, “How much should you write in a day?” Hemingway advised that, “The best way is always to stop when you are going good and when you know what will happen next. If you do that every day when you are writing a novel you will never be stuck.” This advice indicates that there are conditions that apply for task incompletion to have a beneficial effect. In writing, according to Hemingway, that condition is for the author to feel that he/she is going well and to be cognizant of the direction in which the writing will proceed. We concur with this condition, but propose it in broader terms (so that it can apply to a wider range of tasks, not just writing): that the person doing the task should be reasonably close to completing the task, so much so that he/she can perceive that it is within his/her grasp to complete it, but at the same time he/she perceives the task as being reasonably challenging (at least in part due to the fact that he/she was not able to finish it there and then). If the person is far from completing the task, then it is likely that he/she would perceive the task as being too difficult and the beneficial effect of incompletion would likely diminish or not apply at all. On the other hand, if the person finishes the task, he/she would likely perceive the task as easy and not adequately challenging – hence, he/she would not be as motivated to re-engage in the same or any continuation of the task.

1.2. Why failing to finish a task can have beneficial effects

The earliest research studies indicating that benefits can arise from not being able to finish tasks were perhaps those by Bluma Zeigarnik and Maria Ovsiankina. In experiments they conducted in which participants were given tasks to perform but were interrupted in completing some of those tasks, Zeigarnik found that participants remembered better the tasks that were unfinished, while Ovsiankina found that participants had a tendency to resume tasks they had not yet completed – even when such completion was of no obvious benefit to them at all. Ovsiankina interpreted her results as indicating that not being able to complete a task they were performing creates an internal pressure on people that makes them want to pick up the task again to finish it. The findings from these experiments have been used in Gestalt psychology as evidence to show that people’s minds have a natural tendency to form global wholes, not just perceptually but also cognitively and behaviorally.

Since the Zeigarnik and Ovsiankina studies, a number of other studies have confirmed that task performance interruption does tend to make people want to later re-engage in the unfinished task – or even a substitute – in an apparent need for some form of closure. Kupor, Reich, and Shiv reported that participants who were interrupted at a climactic point in a video they were watching were subsequently more likely to make purchase decisions without considering further alternatives. They interpreted this finding in terms of the climactic interruption creating a need for psychological closure and the participants pursuing that closure in an unrelated domain (purchasing decisions) that they were presented immediately after the interruption. In another study, Halkjelsvik and Rise reported that half of the participants they had who were undertaking a boring online task chose to finish the task after they were interrupted in completing it – even in the absence of economic reward (i.e., they were not going to get paid any more for completing the task). Halkjelsvik and Rise noted that the participants’ reported persistence motives reflected a desire to complete per se (i.e., for no other reason). They suggested that in such cases, the original means (completing the task) becomes a goal on its own, substituting the original goal (which was to receive payment).

In the field of education, Craig proposed that students’ motivation for continued learning is better fostered by procedures that do not convey the finality of a task. In the study he conducted, students who did not receive a mathematical rule at the end of an initial learning task (the rule provision being indicative to students that the learning for that task was finished already), undertook more independent study following that initial learning and performed better in a subsequent test assessing that learning, compared to students who received the rule. This result suggests that when students do not perceive their learning of something as being finished, they are more likely to try and learn more about it, and as a consequence they are also more likely to attain better learning outcomes. This seems like an important educational principle, especially considering that motivation is a significant factor in educational outcomes. However, this result from the Craig study does not appear to have received much attention since its publication. It is also a principle that likely links to the broader idea that not finishing a task can have beneficial effects on motivation. What would therefore be important is to determine the mechanisms that might explain that beneficial effect, and whether any conditions might apply (i.e., Is failure to complete always beneficial, or only under certain circumstances?).

One condition that appears important is that the task be perceived as adequately challenging, although the mere failure to complete the task may in itself elevate the perception of that challenge for the person performing it. Failure to complete fundamentally implies that the task was unachievable – and therefore presents a challenge – at the person’s current level of performance. (Of course, if the person were to raise his/her level of performance, the task could become achievable.) Numerous studies have shown that challenge positively impacts motivation. Wilkie’s study revealed that students perceived more challenging mathematical tasks positively in terms of both affect (i.e., enjoyment, engagement, interest) and benefits to learning. Furthermore, providing the more challenging tasks led to an increase in the students’ mastery goal orientation (i.e., valuing the process of learning itself and the development of new skills). Congruent with these findings, Hung, Sun, and Yu found that more challenging math education games were more effective in improving students’ motivation, flow experience (i.e., experience of immersion in the activity being undertaken), learning performance, and learning satisfaction
Facing challenges can of course cause stress, and stress can be detrimental to learning performance. However, there is research evidence indicating that stress associated with challenges in the learning environment has a positive relationship with learning performance. Even fear associated with considering the negative consequences of failure can have a positive impact on subjective appraisals of task value and on academic self-efficacy when that fear is appraised by students as challenging. In other words, whether a person sees something as challenging or as threatening likely makes a difference as to whether it will have a positive or negative impact on that person. Reported personal benefits of challenge seeking include the promotion of academic self-efficacy and interest development, and these in turn promote better learning performance.
It is important to consider, however, whether all challenges are necessarily beneficial. For example, would a challenge so great – and seemingly out of reach – not become demotivating instead, or even threatening? Perhaps a challenge needs to be perceived as achievable for it to be motivating? Research into the “near miss” phenomenon suggests that if a person perceives that he/she is close to being successful, but fails to reach the intended goal (hence, the “near miss”), that would make the person want to try again, perhaps to avoid any regret that may be felt because of the failure. Failure to reach the anticipated goal produces frustration in the person which fuels his/her behavior of attempting again and again to succeed in the goal that is viewed as within reach. The near miss phenomenon has been used to explain gambling behavior and addiction. It may also qualify when a person who has failed to complete a task would likely be more motivated to re-engage in completing that task. In other words, a challenge such as completing a task that a person has previously failed to finish may be more motivating the closer the person perceives he/she was in finishing the task in his/her previous attempt. In essence, this is what we believe to be the Hemingway effect.

### 1.3. The present study

Thus, in the present study, we examined whether empirical evidence would support our notion of the Hemingway effect. More specifically, we tested the hypothesis (H1) that the smaller the amount a person has remaining in an uncompleted task, the more motivated that person would be in continuing to finish that task. In Study 1, we used a manual writing task, in which participants were asked to simply copy text (in Japanese) from newspaper columns. The task was devoid of any obvious learning or other benefits for the participants, but at the same time it would have been easy to see how close or how far they were from finishing when interrupted in completing the task. Our rationale for selecting this task was to find out whether the Hemingway effect would manifest given the most basic conditions we have described in the preceding section.
In Study 2, we used another writing task: a short composition task. Our main reason for selecting this task was that we wanted a task that would be closer to what students are sometimes required to undertake in academic settings. Furthermore, we administered either “structured” (we provided guidance on what to write about in the first and second parts of the composition) or “unstructured” (no guidance was provided) compositions. Our reason for adding this manipulation was to test a second hypothesis (H2): that the Hemingway effect would only manifest in the “structured” condition. The reason for this is that, with structure, we predicted that participants would be better able to gauge what more they needed to write to complete – and hence they would be more motivated to resume if they could envisage more clearly that what remained for them to finish was well within grasp. In contrast, in the “unstructured” condition, we predicted that many participants would be uncertain about the kinds of information they should include in the composition and thus, when interrupted from completing, they would find it harder to gauge their proximity from satisfactory completion.
In both Studies 1 and 2, we decided to use task-interruption as the failure induction mechanism as this was congruent with most of the other previous studies in this area and would allow more direct comparison with and further clarification of their findings. In gambling research, failure is often defined as a miss in lottery or other types of chance or skill games. We decided against the use of such a definition in this research as it would be limited in facilitating better understanding of failure mechanisms in educational settings where decisions and outcomes are not strictly binary. In future research, we considered it would be useful to examine criterion-based failure (i.e., failure as a consequence of not meeting a specific criterion), but we decided against the use of it in this initial investigation, as the complexities involved would likely shift the focus away from the basic processes we wanted to understand.

### 2. Study 1

#### 2.1. Method

##### 2.1.1. Participants
The participants were 260 first-year undergraduate students in the education department of one university in the Kanto area of Japan (female = 169, mean age = 18.36 years). The students voluntarily participated in the data collection, which was conducted in the first part of two regular lecture sessions (students who did not want to participate had the option of undertaking lecture preparation or review activities instead). The experimenter announced to the students that the data collection was part of an experiment he was conducting, and not part of the lecture content. ## 2.1.2. Materials and procedure

The newspaper column copying task was administered to the participants in two groups, during the lecture sessions noted above. We presented the newspaper columns to copy on an A4 sheet of paper with a writing grid just below the columns, which is where we asked the participants to copy the columns (see Fig. 1). We used two real newspaper articles (one about deer in wildlife, which was 169 characters long, and the other about the meaning of colors, which was 157 characters long) so that we could also examine whether the topic of the task might make a difference to participant responses. The articles were written in Japanese. In the Japanese writing system, a single character can be equivalent to a word, part of a word, letter, or letter combination in the English writing system (i.e., the characters do not consistently correspond to a single component of spoken language, like letters generally corresponding to phonemes in English). Also, in copying the newspaper text, the participants needed to write the characters in the grid starting from the top right and going down; hence progressing from top to bottom – and right to left – as is usual when grid format-writing in Japanese.

Before the newspaper column copying task, we asked the participants to complete the Japanese version of the Achievement Motivation Scale (AMS; Lang & Fries, 2006; Mitsunami, 2010), which comprises 10 items (e.g., I am attracted by tasks in which I can test my abilities; I feel uneasy to do something if I am not sure of succeeding) to which participants need to respond about their agreement or disagreement on a 10-point Likert-type scale. The AMS generates scores on two achievement motives, “hope of success” (HS) and “fear of failure” (FF). We administered it to find out if students’ motivation to continue with a task they failed to complete might be related to these motives.

Concerning the newspaper column copying task, we verbally instructed participants to copy the text from the newspaper columns onto the grid provided (see Fig. 1). We told them that they would have a limited amount of time to copy, so they should work quickly without sacrificing accuracy. Prior to starting, we asked them to rate how motivated they felt to do the task (Pre-task motivation) by responding on a 10-point Likert-type scale with the ends anchored at 1 = “not motivated at all to do”, and 10 = “very motivated to do”. After we had instructed them to start copying, we also asked them to indicate when they had finished by raising their hand.

Once the first few students started raising their hands, we asked all students to stop copying (at 2 min and 40 s after starting). Thus Table 1
Means, medians, and standard deviations of the variables measured in Study 1 (N = 260).

|                      | Pre-task motivation | Remaining | Post-task motivation | Fatigue | Hope of success | Fear of failure |
|----------------------|---------------------|-----------|----------------------|---------|-----------------|-----------------|
| Mean                 | 4.18                | 27.90     | 5.00                 | 5.30    | 2.84            | 2.93            |
| Median               | 4.00                | 25.00     | 5.00                 | 6.00    | 2.80            | 3.00            |
| SD                   | 2.71                | 20.29     | 3.27                 | 3.15    | 0.55            | 0.65            |

the majority of them failed to complete the task. At that point, we asked them to count and write on their sheet the number of remaining text characters they had not managed to copy (Remaining text). After that, we asked them to rate on another 10-point Likert-type scale how motivated they felt (again, 1 = “not motivated at all to do”, and 10 = “very motivated to do”) to continue the task to finish it, or – if they had finished – to continue copying similar newspaper columns (Post-task motivation). Finally, we asked them to rate how tired they felt (Fatigue), also on a 10-point Likert-type scale (1 = “not tired at all”, and 10 = “very tired”).

2.2. Results

2.2.1. Preliminary analyses and summary statistics
In independent t-tests we conducted, we found no differences between the two newspaper articles used (i.e., about deer in wildlife, and the meaning of colors) in terms of participants’ Pre-task motivation, Remaining text, Post-task motivation, and Fatigue scores. Hence we combined the data from these two articles in the subsequent analyses we conducted.
The means, medians, and standard deviations of the variables we measured are shown in Table 1.
Since the objective of this study was to examine how motivation might change for people who do not complete a task – according to how close they are to completing the task, we conducted the correlational analysis of the variables excluding data from participants who were able to complete the task (n = 29). Participants who had missing data (n = 10) were also excluded; hence, data from 221 participants were included in this correlational analysis, the results of which are shown in Table 2. These show that Post-task motivation was significantly correlated with Pre-task motivation, Remaining text (negatively), and Hope of success. Pre-task motivation was also significantly negatively correlated with Remaining text.

2.2.2. Was there evidence of the Hemingway effect?
An important finding of the correlation analysis we conducted (shown in Table 2) is that Remaining text was significantly negatively correlated with the participants’ Post-task motivation. This means that the fewer text script characters they were not able to finish copying, the more motivated they reported wanting to continue the task to finish it. This relationship is portrayed in Fig. 2 data plot, which also shows the negative slope of the line of best fit (y = −.06x + 7.02).
However, the correlation analysis also showed that participants’ Pre-task motivation was significantly correlated with their Post-task motivation. In other words, those who had higher motivation before undertaking the task also had higher motivation after engaging in the task. To address the implication of this on the relationship we were examining, we initially considered conducting an analysis of covariance (ANCOVA), with Pre-task motivation as the covariate. However, an assumption for conducting an ANCOVA (homogeneity of regression slopes) did not hold, so we instead conducted a univariate repeated-measures ANOVA, with time (pre-task, post-task) as the repeated independent variable, participant groupings according to amount of remaining text as the other independent variable (completed, fewer, more), and motivation as the dependent variable. For the participant groupings, 29 participants “completed”, 101 participants had “fewer” remaining text, and 120 participants had “more” text (10 participants had missing data which necessitated their exclusion from this analysis). We distinguished between “fewer” and “more” remaining text based on the median number of remaining text (i.e., greater than or equal to the median, 25, was designated as “more”, and less than 25 was designated as “fewer”).
The analysis revealed significant main effects for time (F(1, 147) = 41.14, p = .008, ηp 2= .03), and participant grouping (F(2, 247) = 10.68, p < .001, η2= .08). More importantly, it also revealed that the interaction between time and participant grouping was significant, (F(2, 247) = 5.83, p = .003, ηp 2= .05). Simple main effects analysis (Bonferroni) revealed that the three participant groups (completed, fewer, and more) did not significantly differ at the .05 level in their Pre-task motivation.

Table 2
Correlations between the variables measured in Study 1 for participants who did not complete the task.

| Variables                                      | [1]         | [2]         | [3]                  | [4]         | [5]             | [6]             |
|------------------------------------------------|-------------|-------------|----------------------|-------------|-----------------|-----------------|
| [1] Pre-task motivation                         | 1           |             |                      |             |                 |                 |
| [2] Remaining text                              | −.16* **   | 1           |                      |             |                 |                 |
| [3] Post-task motivation                        | .33         | −.35**     | 1                    |             |                 |                 |
| [4] Fatigue                                     | .08         | −.06       | .11**               | 1           |                 |                 |
| [5] Hope of success                             | .07         | −.06       | .19                 | .04         | 1               |                 |
| [6] Fear of failure                             | −.08       | .02        | .01                 | .05         | −.01            | 1               |

*p < .05. **p < .01. participants belonging to the “fewer” group (i.e., those who had 24 or fewer text characters remaining) had a significantly higher Post-task motivation compared to those in the “more” (i.e., those who had 25 or more text characters remaining) and “completed” (i.e., those who completed the task) groups. These latter two groups did not differ in their Post-task motivation. This interaction is visually depicted in Fig. 3.

## 2.3. Discussion of Study 1

The results of Study 1 provide support for our conception of the Hemingway effect. In other words, the smaller the amount a person has remaining in an uncompleted task, the more motivated that person would be in taking action to finish that task. In this study, the results of both the correlational analysis and the univariate repeated-measures ANOVA indicate that those who failed to complete the copying task, but had fewer remaining text characters to copy, manifested higher Post-task motivation compared to those who had more text characters remaining, who in turn did not differ in their Post-task motivation from those who managed to complete the task.

The results of Study 1 suggest that failing to complete but being close to completing can be motivational, but being further away from completion does not have the same beneficial effect on motivation. However, the copying task we administered in Study 1 was not typical of tasks that students would normally be required to do, and thus the generalizability of those findings in real educational contexts may be somewhat limited. Thus, in Study 2 we devised and administered a compositional task that was more similar to what students or people in general may realistically be required to do. We also aimed to better understand the conditions required to perceive a task as being close to completion by manipulating the presence or otherwise of structure in the task.

## 3. Study 2

As noted, the purpose of Study 2 was to confirm whether the Hemingway effect could be observed in a task that was more typical of what people may normally be required to undertake. We also wanted to test the second hypothesis of this study (H2): that the Hemingway effect would only manifest in a structured condition in which students were provided guidance in what to write in the first and second parts of a writing composition. Our prediction was that the structure would enable students to better gauge how

| Completed | Fewer | More |
|-----------|-------|------|
| 4.5       |       |      |
| 3.5       |       |      |

Motivational levels reported by participants in the three groupings at pre- and post-task. ## 3.1. Method

### 3.1.1. Participants
The participants were 131 first-year undergraduate students in one university in Japan (female = 79, mean age = 18.4 years). The students, who belonged to one class, voluntarily participated in the data collection, which was again conducted in the first part of a regular lecture session (students who did not want to participate had the option of undertaking lecture preparation or review activities instead).

### 3.1.2. Materials and procedure
We distributed to the students who were willing to participate an A4 size sheet of paper, which had instructions for the study written on the top part of the sheet, a 20 × 10 writing grid for Japanese writing in the middle (similar to that shown in Fig. 1 but with different dimensions), and four questions written on the bottom part of the sheet. The instructions at the top of the page were either for the “structured” or the “unstructured” condition; an equal number of these instructions were printed and they were randomly distributed to the participants. For those in the structured condition, the instructions were as follows: In the time that you will be given, write about your memories from kindergarten to high school. In the first part, write about your memories from kindergarten through to elementary school level. Then in the second part, write about your memories from junior high school through to high school level. You do not need to fill in all of the text spaces in the grid, but you need to write at least 100 script characters. For those in the unstructured condition, the instructions were the same, except without the structure provided in the underlined sentences above. Hence the instructions they received were as follows: In the time that you will be given, write about your memories from kindergarten to high school. You do not need to fill in all of the text spaces in the grid, but you need to write at least 100 script characters. Prior to giving the signal for the students to start writing, we asked them to answer the first question printed on the bottom part of the sheet. This question simply asked, “How motivated do you feel to do this task?” They were required to respond on a Likert-type scale where 1 = “not motivated at all to do” and 10 = “very motivated to do”. After answering this question, we asked them to start writing. So that the majority of the participants would fail to finish writing, we asked them to raise their hand as soon as they had finished writing. Approximately 30 s after the first person had raised her hand, we asked all the students to stop writing. In total they had 3 min to write. We then asked the participants to answer the three remaining questions printed on the bottom part of the sheet. Question 2 asked the students to count and write the number of text script characters they wrote (i.e., how many of the grid spaces they managed to fill out in writing about their school memories). Question 3 asked, “How close do you feel you were to completing the task?” They were required to respond to this question on a 10-point Likert-type scale with the ends anchored at 1 = “very far from completion” and 10 = “completed”. Finally, Questions 4 asked about their Post-task motivation: “How motivated do you feel about continuing this task to finish it? (for those who have completed, how motivated do you feel about doing a similar writing task?)”. They were asked to respond to this question on a Likert-type scale where 1 = “not motivated at all to do” and 10 = “very motivated to do”.

## 3.2. Results

### 3.2.1. Preliminary analyses and summary statistics
Independent t-tests were used to examine the effect of the writing conditions (structured vs. unstructured) on the participants’ Pre-task motivation, the number of text characters they wrote, their feeling about how close they were to completing the task, and their Post-task motivation. The summary statistics (means and standard deviations) are shown in Table 3, along with the t-test results. These results showed that the participants in the structured condition rated their Pre-task motivation and their Post-task motivation significantly higher than participants in the unstructured condition.

Table 3
Means and standard deviations of the variables measured in Study 2, and the results of t-tests comparing those variables for the two conditions.

| Variables                                          | Structured (n = 71) | Unstructured (n = 60) | t-test results |
|---------------------------------------------------|----------------------|------------------------|-----------------|
|                                                   | M                    | SD                     | M                | SD               |
| Pre-task motivation                                | 2.89                 | 2.05                   | 2.20             | 1.41             | 2.19*           |
| No. of text characters                             | 125.11               | 26.35                  | 123.10           | 28.51           | .42             |
| Completeness                                       | 6.83                 | 2.58                   | 7.25             | 2.45            | −.95**          |
| Post-task motivation                               | 5.40                 | 3.03                   | 3.60             | 2.75            | 3.48            |

*p < .05. **p < .01. Table 4
Hierarchical regression analysis results for the effects of the independent variables and the interaction between Condition (structured vs. unstructured) and Completeness on Post-task motivation.

| Variable                        | Step 1                     | Step 2                     |
|---------------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
|                                 | b         | b SE         | b         | b SE         |
| Step 1                         |                           |                           |
| Condition                      | 1.32*     | .52         | 1.33**    | .51         |
| Pre-task motivation            | .42**     | .14         | .40**     | .14         |
| No. of text characters         | .04**     | .01         | .03**     | .01         |
| Completeness                   | −.06      | .14         | −.36      | .19         |
| Step 2                         |                           | .54*                     |
| Condition × Completeness       |                           | .24                       |
| ΔR2                            | .28                       | .32                       |
| Adj R2                         | .25                       | .28                       |

*p < .05. **p < .01.

3.2.2. Was there evidence of the Hemingway effect?
Since the purpose of Study 2 was to find out how closeness to completing a short composition task would affect participants’ motivation to re-engage with the task to complete it, we further analyzed only the data from the 98 students who failed to complete writing (i.e., we excluded from subsequent analyses the data from the 33 students who completed the task). We employed hierarchical regression analysis to examine the moderating effect of degree of task completion (Completeness) on the Post-task motivation of the students in the structured and unstructured conditions. The two conditions were dummy coded into one variable (unstructured = 0, structured = 1), and we examined the effect of its interaction with Completeness. In this procedure, Completeness was mean-centered to minimize the problem of multicollinearity. In Step 1, the dependent variable was Post-task motivation, while the independent variables were Pre-task motivation, Number of text characters written, Completeness, and Condition (structured, unstructured). In Step 2, the interaction term was between Condition and Completeness.
The results are shown in Table 4. In Step 1, all of the independent variables, except Completeness, predicted Post-task motivation. The important result, however, was that the interaction term (Condition × Completeness) added a significant amount of explained variance in Step 2 (ΔR2 = .32, F(1, 92) = 5.09, p = .027). This interaction effect can be seen more clearly in the data plot and lines of best fit shown in Fig. 4.
We conducted a simple slope analysis to further examine the nature of this interaction. We examined the regression slopes for the independent variable of Condition at lower (−1SD) and higher (+1SD) levels of Completeness. The results showed that when Completeness was higher, the influence of the Condition (i.e., whether the writing task was structured or unstructured) was significant, b = 3.15, SE b = .78, p < .001. However, when Completeness was lower, the influence of condition was not significant, b = .18, SE b = .79, p = .83. This means that, it was only when the students were close to completing the task they failed to finish, that the presence of structure or otherwise in that writing task mattered: if they had the structured writing task – and they were close to completing – they evidence higher motivation to re-engage with that task to finish it.
But how close to completion did they have to be for the presence of structure to have mattered? We conducted the Johnson-Neyman analysis to calculate the level of the moderator (Completeness) that yields the significant simple slope. The result showed that, for Completeness ratings of 5.38 or higher, participants who received the structured composition had significantly higher Post-task motivation than those who received the unstructured composition, p < .05.

Fig. 4. Post-task motivation as a function of Completeness for the two writing Conditions (structured, unstructured). ## 3.3. Discussion of Study 2

The results of Study 2 provide support for our second hypothesis (H2): that the Hemingway effect would only manifest in the structured condition in which we provided students guidance in what to write in the first and second parts of their brief writing task. This finding is important in that it qualifies when we might be able to observe the Hemingway effect to manifest in failure-to-complete situations – and that is when people are not only close to finishing the task, but they also can clearly or tangibly perceive what would be required for them to complete that task. In Study 1, that closeness was tangibly clear as the participants were asked to count the remaining newspaper text characters they had not been able to copy onto the grid. In Study 2, however, that closeness to finishing was not as obvious: What and how much to include of their memories from kindergarten to high school was not clarified, and so what would constitute completeness was subjective (i.e., up to the participant to decide for him/herself), the constraint being only that they wrote between 100 (the specified minimum) and 200 (the number of spaces provided in the grid) text script characters. For most of the students in the unstructured condition who did not finish, how much more they needed to write would have been unclear as there were no criteria against which to compare what they had managed to write. Thus, although they had to rate their level of Completeness, their awareness of what more they needed to write to complete would have been more vague. Would finishing the school memory they were writing about be enough? Should they write about one or two more memories? This kind of vagueness about the requirements to achieve completion would not likely have been motivational.

In contrast, the participants in the structured condition had to write about their kindergarten and elementary school memories in the first part, and about their junior high school and high school memories in the second part. Thus, when they were told to stop writing, they would have had a more tangible awareness of what more they needed to write to complete. For example, if they had written about two particular memories in the first part, and they were part way through writing the first memory in the second part, they would know that it would probably be adequate to write about one more memory to complete the second part. Hence, if they perceived themselves to have been close – and were clearer about exactly what more they needed to write to complete – that would have been motivating to re-engage with the task and complete it. The results of the hierarchical regression analysis, revealing that the interaction between Condition and Completeness explained a significant amount of the variance in Post-task motivation, and the slope analysis, showing that it was only when students were closer to completion that writing structure mattered as far as Post-task motivation was concerned, provide support for this explanation of the Hemingway effect mechanism.

Comment needs to be made about the difference in Pre-task motivation between the participants in the two conditions: those in the structured condition were significantly higher compared to those in the unstructured condition. This is understandable as it would likely have been more motivating to undertake a task in which what and how to write were clarified, compared to a task in which those details were vague. Furthermore, in Step 1 of the hierarchical regression analysis, we found that Pre-task motivation did significantly contribute to explaining Post-task motivation. This means that the participants’ levels of motivation at the beginning did influence their levels of motivation at the end (this of course was true for participants in both structured and unstructured conditions). The important point however is that despite the influence of Pre-task motivation and some of the other independent variables on Post-task motivation, the interaction between Condition and Completeness still explained a significant amount of the variance in Post-task motivation in Step 2 of the hierarchical regression analysis. This means that, after taking into consideration the influence of the other independent variables, the interaction between whether the participants were in the structured or unstructured condition and how close they were to completion, still explained a significant amount of the variation in their subsequent motivation to re-engage with and finish the task they had failed to complete. The result of the simple slope analysis further clarified that only when the participants were close to finishing did the condition they were in mattered: then, if they were in the structured condition, their motivation to complete the task proved to be higher.

## 4. General discussion

### 4.1. Evidence for and mechanism of the Hemingway effect

The present study had two main purposes: first, to find empirical evidence to support the notion that not finishing a task can have a beneficial effect on motivation to re-engage with the task to complete it; and second, to clarify the conditions under which such beneficial effects can occur. The results we obtained in Study 1 revealed that participants who had fewer text script characters remaining to copy when they were interrupted and failed to finish were better motivated to continue the task compared to those who had more remaining and those who had managed to finish the task. This therefore provides evidence for the existence of the Hemingway effect. The results of Study 2 indicate two conditions for the Hemingway effect to occur: first, clarity about what more needs to be done to complete the unfinished task; and second, perception of closeness to completing that task. Thus, when participants in Study 2 were closer in terms of their perception about completing the writing task, whether they were in the structured or the unstructured condition mattered: if they were in the former, they evidenced higher motivation to re-engage with and complete the task, presumably because the structure guidance made it easier for them to see what more they needed to write – hence, its manageability.

The findings of this research add to those of previous studies that have investigated the possible benefits of failing to finish tasks. More specifically, it clarifies whether an unfinished task (resulting from interruption or otherwise) is sufficiently motivational on its own, or some other condition additionally needs to be satisfied for it to be motivational. The initial studies conducted by Zeigarnik and Ovsiankina in the late 1920s appeared to suggest that simple task interruption – and the resulting unfinished task – is enough to trigger beneficial effects. However, there have been other investigations that have failed to replicate the findings about the benefits of task interruption, and even in the Halkjelsvik and Rise study, only “23%–54% of all participants” chose to continue the interrupted task with no economic benefit – meaning that 46–77% chose not to continue it. These observations suggest that failure to finish (and therefore having an unfinished task) on its own may not be that motivating – in fact, in some cases it could well be demotivating, especially if the unfinished task seems too difficult and there is an overwhelming amount remaining to do of it. But previous research had neither addressed nor clarified the conditions needed for experiences of completion failure to result in beneficial outcomes. Our present findings therefore contribute to this area by clarifying exactly when failure to complete can improve motivation: we have shown that the two conditions of (1) perception of closeness to finishing, and (2) clarity about what more needs to be done, need to be met.

Identification of these two conditions is important not only from an applied perspective, but also from a theoretical perspective. Where theory is concerned, perception of closeness to finishing is akin to the “near miss” phenomenon, which links this line of research to another line of research into persistence which is more usually concerned with gambling behavior and addiction. Through this connection, however, we gain a better understanding of how people would prefer to persist in something – despite previously failing – when they perceive that success had been close. As explained, in such cases, people would want to try again to alleviate feelings of regret they may experience because of failing when they had been so close to succeeding. To this explanation, the two conditions provide additional insight into why gambling persistence might occur. First, because the difference between a win and a loss in gambling often appears minimal (e.g., “If only I got another face card …”, “If only that second dice rolled over once more …”), it creates an illusion of having been close to the desired goal state of winning. Second, because in gambling, decisions and actions are simple (e.g., deciding to be “in” rather than “out”, inserting coins into a slot), they create another illusion that the steps necessary to reach the goal state of winning are obvious and simple enough to take. Because both conditions necessary for the Hemingway effect to occur are usually satisfied in gambling environments, this provides a complementary perspective to explain why many people are motivated to continue gambling despite the losses they have incurred.

The second requirement of knowing what more to do to finish also connects this line of research to the learning motivation research area, particularly the expectancy-value theory. In simple terms, the expectancy-value theory proposes that our motivation to engage in a particular behaviour would be high when we expect it to lead to success in achieving a goal that we value. If either our expectancy of success or the value we attach to the goal is lacking or inadequate, our motivation will suffer. Where the present research is concerned, we are proposing that increased motivation to re-engage in the unfinished task would only occur when people can clearly see what more they need to do to finish it – thus supporting their expectation to succeed when they reinvest effort in completing the task.

The two conditions we identified in the present study also have support in previous research concerning goal attainment and motivation, curiosity, and insight. A number of earlier studies have shown that motivational strength in people and animals increases as distance from their intended goal decreases. In other words, as people and animals get closer to a goal they are aiming for, they tend to evidence increases in motivational intensity and persistence. In research on curiosity, there is also evidence indicating that people tend to become more curious as their perceived amount of knowledge about an item (i.e., the object of curiosity) increases. Although not exactly the same as the studies in goal attainment and motivation, if we consider finding out the crucial information to address the knowledge gap (i.e., the source of the curiosity) as the ‘goal’ in such cases, the reported findings suggest a similar situation: when people get closer to their goal (i.e., closing the knowledge gap that has arisen), their motivation increases – in this case, they become more curious and hence more motivated to find out. More recent research in curiosity has also revealed that people experience greater negative affect, discomfort, and annoyance when there is a longer waiting time before they can obtain the information they need to satisfy a curiosity. This adds further support to the notion that closeness to the goal – not just in terms of incremental components but also time – impacts human response processes (i.e., motivation and the related construct of curiosity), perhaps because closeness makes closing the knowledge or performance gap seem much more attainable.

Research concerning insight (i.e., the sudden realization of the complete and correct solution to a problem) may also provide another explanation as to why clarity in what more needs to be done is necessary for failure in completing a task to become motivational. In this research area, evidence suggests that the experience of insight following an impasse only occurs when the distance between the state in which the impasse is broken and the goal state is sufficiently short and within the range of mental look-ahead. Mental look-ahead refers to being able to see in one’s mind’s eye the exact steps necessary for a successful solution. But mental look-ahead has a limited range, perhaps as a consequence of the limitations of working memory. Thus, if the goal state (i.e., successful solution of the problem) is further away than the mental look-ahead can reach, no experience of “insight” will occur even when the state of impasse has been broken. However, if the goal state is within the range of mental look-ahead, the construction of the path to the solution in the mind’s eye will happen very quickly, leaving little or no traces in consciousness. The problem solver may therefore experience the complete solution coming to mind as if suddenly – as “insight”. The same shortness of the path to the goal state may be crucial in making failure to finish motivational. If the path is short and obvious, it will be within the range of mental look-ahead, appearing clearly as doable and thus highly motivational. If the path is longer or more obscure (as in the unstructured composition), limitations in working memory resources may make the mental look-ahead to the goal state impossible. Thus, arriving at that goal state becomes less obvious and less motivational. ## 4.2. Implications for practice

The findings of the present research indicate that failure to complete a task can be beneficial under certain conditions, but it is important to consider how it may be possible to capitalize on such benefits. In educational contexts, one important way could be not to convey the finality of learning tasks that students engage in – as suggested in the Craig study, and also in the Study 1 finding of the present research that students who completed the task were subsequently less motivated to re-engage with that task compared to those who were close but did not manage to complete. The Craig study found that students undertook more independent study – and subsequently performed better in related tests – when they did not perceive the learning they were engaged in to be finished. The view that learning is continuous and never finished seems like an important perspective to cultivate in educational environments, and it aligns with the concept of lifelong learning. However, promoting it may be challenging especially in many typical educational environments where testing and other forms of assessment predominate everyday learning goals and activities, as these assessments convey – both explicitly and implicitly – an end point to learning.

Nevertheless, the present study’s findings would suggest that teachers should as much as possible promote the idea that learning is never finished – that there is always more learning to be undertaken. One way to achieve this would be to devote some time on review at the end of each lesson (or school day – depending on the educational level), not only to consider accomplishments, but also what more needs to be done – including what the teacher, each student, or class as a whole might have failed to finish (of course, this failure to finish needs to be normalized and viewed as an acceptable outcome in everyday learning if it is to promote any positive outcomes). Among other things, the review should facilitate consideration of what has not been completed as challenges to tackle the next day or the next appropriate opportunity. The teacher should model or guide students in how they could plan or structure courses of action for managing such challenges. That way, the review could provide invaluable opportunities for cultivating students’ metacognitive skills for planning the next steps in what they need to work on, so that those challenges would appear more manageable. Challenges that are perceived as more manageable are more motivating to take up again later, as the finding in Study 2 of the current research suggests where structure was provided for the writing composition.

## 4.3. Limitations and directions for future research

In the present study, we examined the Hemingway effect on two writing-related tasks. This could be considered appropriate as the advice that Hemingway imparted concerned writing. However, we believe that the Hemingway effect is applicable to a wide range of tasks and behaviors that people engage in – not just writing. Thus, in future research, it would be important to investigate the occurrence or otherwise of this effect on a wide range of educational and non-educational tasks and behaviors – including cognitive, creative, physical, work, and social. For example, it would be useful to examine whether the Hemingway effect would manifest even in domain specific problem solving activities (e.g., solving math or science problems, writing computer programs or business reports). We predict that, based on the reasons we have earlier discussed about motivational influences and perception of gaps in knowledge/performance, the effect would manifest as long as the two conditions of perception of adequate closeness to completion and clarity about the required steps for completion are met. It would also be necessary to examine cases where there is no forced task interruption, but rather students are naturally unable to proceed (e.g., because of the time of day or another commitment). Again, in such cases we predict that the Hemingway effect would manifest if the two conditions are met – but not in cases where those conditions are violated (e.g., students perceive task completion as being out of reach, or they lack sufficient knowledge to see how they can complete the task).

Some readers may wonder whether the participants in the present study, being Japanese university students, might have been better motivated in general than other students in other countries – and thus whether this could have influenced the detection of the Hemingway effect. We did not take measurements of the participants’ general academic motivation in the present study. However, a number of previous studies have revealed no advantage for Japanese university students as far as academic motivation is concerned – in fact, if anything, many tend to deteriorate in study motivation by the time they reach university. Nevertheless, to confirm the generalizability of the present findings, it would be helpful in future research to examine the occurrence of the Hemingway effect among students in other countries, as well as from other educational levels (e.g., primary, middle, and high schools; vocational colleges).

Related to the above points, it would be important in future studies to design, implement, and evaluate educational applications of the Hemingway effect. As the effect in essence is better motivation for task completion, and motivation is a crucial factor that influences educational outcomes, it would be useful to examine the possibility of appropriately facilitating this effect to bring about improvements in student learning performance.

## Funding

This research was supported by a grant-in-aid received from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.

## Conflict of interest

There is no conflict of interest known to the authors. Y. Oyama et al.                                                                                                                                                Thinking Skills and Creativity 30 (2018) 7–18

| Reference | Details |
|-----------|---------|
| Ames, C., & Archer, J. | Achievement goals in the classroom: Students’ learning strategies and motivation processes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 80, 260–267. |
| Amsel, A. | The role of frustrative nonreward in noncontinuous reward situations. Psychological Bulletin, 55, 102–119. |
| Baddeley, A. D. | Working memory. Oxford: Oxford University Press. |
| Berlyne, D. E. | An experimental study of human curiosity. British Journal of Psychology, 45, 256–265. |
| Brown, J. S. | Gradients of approach and avoidance responses and their relation to motivation. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 41, 450–465. |
| Cote, D., Caron, A., Aubert, J., Desrochers, V., & Ladouceur, R. | Near wins prolong gambling on a video lottery terminal. Journal of Gambling Studies, 19, 433–438. |
| Craig, R. C. | Discovery, task completion, and the assignment as factors in motivation. American Educational Research Journal, 2, 217–222. |
| Deci, E. L., Vallerand, R. J., Pelletier, L. G., & Ryan, R. M. | Motivation and education: The self-determination perspective. Educational Psychologist, 26, 325–346. |
| Dunlap, J. C., & Grabinger, S. | Preparing students for lifelong learning: A review of instructional features and teaching methodologies. Performance Improvement Quarterly, 16(2), 6–25. |
| Eccles, J. S., Adler, T. F., Futterman, R., Goff, S. B., Kaczala, C. M., Meece, J. L., et al. | Expectancies, values, and academic behaviors. In J. T. Spence (Ed.). Achievement and achievement motivation (pp. 75–146). San Francisco, CA: W.H. Freeman. |
| Farina, A. | Maria Rickers-Ovsiankina (1898–1993). American Psychologist, 51, 650. |
| Forster, J., Higgins, E. T., & Idson, L. C. | Approach and avoidance strength during goal attainment: Regulatory focus and the goal looms larger effect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 1115–1131. |
| Gjesme, T. | Goal distance in time and its effects on the relations between achievement motives and performance. Journal of Research in Personality, 8, 161–171. |
| Halkjelsvik, T., & Rise, J. | Persistence motives in irrational decisions to complete a boring task. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 41, 90–102. |
| Hemingway, E. | Monologue to a maestro: A high seas letter. Esquire, 4, 21, 174A, 174B. |
| Hung, C.-Y., Sun, J. C.-Y., & Yu, P.-T. | The benefits of a challenge: Student motivation and flow experience in tablet-PC-game-based modelling. Interactive Learning Environments, 23, 172–190. |
| Jones, S. | Curiosity and knowledge. Psychological Reports, 45, 639–642. |
| Kassinove, J. I., & Schare, M. L. | Effects of the near miss and the big win on persistence at slot machine gambling. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 15, 155–158. |
| Koffka, K. | Principles of gestalt psychology (6th ed.). London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. |
| Kupor, D. M., Reich, T., & Shiv, B. | Can’t finish what you started? The effect of climactic interruption on behavior. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 25, 113–119. |
| Lang, J. W. B., & Fries, S. | A revised 10-item version of the Achievement Motives Scale: Psychometric properties in German-speaking samples. European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 22, 216–224. |
| LePine, J. A., LePine, M. A., & Jackson, C. L. | Challenge and hindrance stress: Relationships with exhaustion, motivation to learn, and learning performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 883–891. |
| Loewenstein, G. | The psychology of curiosity: A review and reinterpretation. Psychological Bulletin, 116, 75–98. |
| Losco, J., & Epstein, S. | Relative steepness of approach and avoidance gradients as a function of magnitude and valence of incentive. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 86, 360–368. |
| Lupien, S. J., McEwen, B. S., Gunnar, M. R., & Heim, C. | Effects of stress throughout the lifespan on the brain, behavior and cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10, 434–445. |
| Manalo, E., Koyasu, M., Hashimoto, K., & Miyauchi, T. | Factors that impact on the academic motivation of Japanese university students in Japan and in New Zealand. Psychologia, 49, 114–131. |
| Mitsunami, M. | Influence of achievement motive and goal orientation on learning behavior: Difference in cognitive strategies. Japanese Journal of Educational Psychology, 58, 348–360. |
| Noordewier, M. K., & van Dijk, E. | Curiosity and time: From not knowing to almost knowing. Cognition and Emotion, 31, 411–421. |
| Ohlsson, S. | Restructuring revisited. II. An information processing theory of restructuring and insight. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 25, 117–129. |
| Ohlsson, S. | Information-processing explanations of insight and related phenomena. In M. Keane, & K. Gilhooly (Eds.). Advances in the psychology of thinking (pp. 1–44). London: Harvester-Wheatsheaf. |
| Ovsiankina, M. | Die wiederaufnahme unterbrochener handlungen [The resumption of interrupted activities]. Psychologische Forschung, 11, 302–379. |
| Phillips, L. W. (Ed.) | Ernest Hemingway on writing. New York: Touchstone. |
| Preacher, K. J., Curran, P. J., & Bauer, D. J. | Computational tools for probing interactions in multiple linear regression, multilevel modelling, and latent curve analysis. Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics, 31, 427–448. |
| Putwain, D. W., Symes, W., & Remedios, R. | The impact of fear appeals on subjective-task value and academic self-efficacy: The role of appraisal. Learning and Individual Differences, 51, 307–313. |
| Reid, R. L. | The psychology of the near miss. Journal of Gambling Behavior, 2, 32–39. |
| Senko, C., & Tropiano, K. L. | Comparing three models of achievement goals: Goal orientations, goal standards, and goal complexes. Journal of Educational Psychology, 108, 1178–1192. |
| Shimoyama, H. | A review of studies on student apathy. Japanese Journal of Educational Psychology, 44, 350–363. |
| Shors, T. J. | Stressful experience and learning across the lifespan. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 55–85. |
| van Bergen, A. | Task interruption. Amsterdam: North Holland. |
| Wigfield, A., & Eccles, J. | The development of achievement task values: A theoretical analysis. Developmental Review, 12, 265–310. |
| Wigfield, A., & Eccles, J. | Expectancy-value theory of motivation. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25, 68–81. |
| Wilkie, K. J. | Rise or resist: Exploring senior secondary students’ reactions to challenging mathematics tasks incorporating multiple strategies. Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science & Technology Education, 12, 2061–2083. |
| Zeigarnik, B. | Das Behalten Erledigter und Unerledigter Handlungen [The retention of completed and uncompleted activities]. Psychologische Forschung, 9, 1–85. | 