Herbal medicine for depression, anxiety and insomnia: A review of psychopharmacology and clinical evidence

| Author | Affiliation |
|--------|-------------|
| Alexander George Panossian | Phytomed AB |
| Con K K Stough | Swinburne University of Technology |
| Andrew Scholey | Monash University (Australia) | # Herbal medicine for depression, anxiety and insomnia: A review of psychopharmacology and clinical evidence

## KEYWORDS
Herbal medicine; Antidepressant; Depression; Anxiolytic; Anxiety; Insomnia; Psychopharmacology; Herbomics; St John's wort; Kava

## Abstract
Research in the area of herbal psychopharmacology has increased markedly over the past decades. To date however, a comprehensive review of herbal antidepressant, anxiolytic and hypnotic psychopharmacology and applications in depression, anxiety and insomnia has been absent. A search of MEDLINE (PubMed), CINAHL, PsycINFO, and the Cochrane Library databases was conducted (up to February 21st 2011) on commonly used psychotropic herbal medicines. A review of the literature was conducted to ascertain mechanisms of action of these botanicals, in addition to a systematic review of controlled clinical trials for treatment of mood, anxiety and sleep disorders, which are common comorbid psychiatric disorders. Specific emphasis was given to emerging phytomedicines. Analysis of evidence levels was conducted, as were effect sizes (Cohen's d) where data were available. Results provided evidence of a range of neurochemical, endocrinological, and epigenetic effects for 21 individual phytomedicines, which are detailed in this paper. Sixty six controlled studies were located involving eleven phytomedicines. Several of these provide a high level of evidence, such as Hypericum perforatum for major depression, and Piper methysticum for anxiety disorders. Several human clinical trials provide preliminary positive evidence of antidepressant effects (Echium amoenum, Crocus sativus, and Rhodiola rosea) and anxiolytic activity (Matricaria recutita, Ginkgo biloba, Passiflora incanata, E. amoenum, and Scutellaria lateriflora). Caution should however be taken when interpreting the results as many studies have not been replicated. Several herbal medicines with in vitro and in vivo evidence are currently unexplored in human studies, and along with use of emerging genetic technologies “herbomics”, are areas of potential future research. # 1. Introduction

# 1.1. Overview of herbal psychopharmacology

Mood, anxiety, and sleep disorders are prevalent and highly comorbid psychiatric conditions that have been treated with botanical medicines since antiquity. Contemporaneously, herbal medicine and Complementary and Alternative Medicine (CAM) use is widespread amongst sufferers of mood and anxiety disorders. Data from a nationally representative sample of 2055 people interviewed during 1997–1998 revealed that 57% of those suffering anxiety attacks, and 54% of those with severe depression reported using herbal medicine and CAM therapies during the previous 12 months to treat their disorder. Interviews of 82 psychiatric North American inpatients hospitalised for acute care for various psychiatric disorders revealed that 44% had used herbal medicine (mainly for psychiatric purposes) during the previous 12 months.

Scientific understanding of psychoactive plants has significantly advanced over the last two centuries, after the isolation of active constituents, such as morphine from opium poppies. Modern research on herbal medicine in psychiatry although still in its infancy, has increased in recent years with a 50% increase in the literature over 5 years up to 2008. Research into psychoactive plants that may affect the central nervous system (CNS) has flourished, with an abundance of pre-clinical in vitro and in vivo studies validating many phytotherapies as having an array of biopsychological effects. Aside from notable psychoactive constituents isolated from plants (usually containing alkaloids) such as cocaine from Erythroxylon coca (coca), morphine from Papaver somniferum (opium poppy), or arecoline from Areca catechu (betel nut), other less potent plants, such as Hypericum perforatum (St John's wort), have developed evidence of beneficial therapeutic activity over the last several decades. Many of these that are available as “over-the-counter” psychotropic herbal medicines are fairly safe, and present with fewer side effects in comparison to conventional pharmacotherapies such as antidepressants (cholinergic symptoms, sexual dysfunction, insomnia, and withdrawal issues) and benzodiazepines (somnolence, dependence and withdrawal issues). Regardless, not all commonly used phytomedicines are safe, for example there are case reports (albeit rare) of H. perforatum causing switching to mania in bipolar disorder and drug interactions, and liver toxicity with Piper methysticum (kava).

Mainstream drug development and, to some degree traditional pharmacognosy (study of nature-derived drugs), often use isolated single active principles from plant material. In some cases this is highly effective, leading for example to the development of aspirin, opiate anaesthetics, digitoxin and taxol. However in certain cases, attempts to isolate the active principles from plant extracts may be ultimately self-defeating since overall biological effects often rely on synergistic and polyvalent interactions between plant components. Thus while in some instances it may be possible to isolate single active principle from plants, it is more common for plant extracts to contain numerous potentially psychoactive components. Presence of several psychoactive compounds in one plant may have a “synergistic” effect, defined as “a working together effect seen by a combination of substances that is greater than would have been expected from a consideration of individual contributions.” The “silver bullet” concept adopted by orthodox Western medicine for the drug discovery over the past 100 years, is now increasingly viewed as inadequate in many clinical situations. As a result, a cocktail of drugs are now commonly employed against conditions such as HIV infection, cancer or hypertension. These synergistic and polyvalence concepts have been used in traditional medicinal systems (e.g. TCM and Ayurvedic medicine) for millennia, and now have become accepted as the practice of polypharmacy. The use of polypharmacy in psychiatry is increasing, with use of combinations of antidepressants and antipsychotics being commonly employed. For example Comer et al. found that across a 12 year period (1996–2007) combination psychotropic treatment in children rose from 14.3% to 20.2% (adjusted OR = 1.89, 95% CI:1.22,2.94; p b 0.01).

An example of synergy can be found in Salvia spp. (sage) which is known to have pro-cognitive and cholinesterase inhibiting properties. Savelev et al. examined the cholinesterase inhibiting properties of components from Salvia lavandulaefolia essential oil. Combinations of constituents demonstrated enhanced cholinesterase inhibition via in vitro synergy at levels which would not be predicted from the activities of individual components. Epigenetic studies are already demonstrating that combinations of constituents are not only having an added effect of triggering the expression of genes, they are in fact triggering. An example of this can be found in a study of a multi-compound herbal product Phytodolor which contains three anti-inflammatory herbs. Epigenetic assays showed that the gene expression profile of the whole formula was unique, and did not reflect the effects from the individual herbs.

A related concept to synergy is that of “polyvalence” which, unlike synergy (which strictly speaking refers to single pharmacological effect), describes the range of biological activities that a herbal extract may exhibit which contribute to the overall in vivo or clinical effect. Polyvalence can occur due to a variety of chemicals being present, each having different physiological effects, or to the presence of one particular chemical which has more than one disease-relevant physiological effect. Alternatively an extract may contain compounds which do not directly affect the pathophysiological processes, but which may modify the absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion of bioactive constituents, or reduce their side-effects. Examples relevant to the current paper include Valeriana officinalis (valerian) which contains constituents with a range of properties relevant to anxiolysis, muscle relaxation, and sleep promotion. These include γ‐aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic compounds such as free Herbal Psychopharmacology

GABA, benzodiazepine receptor-binding flavonoids, the terpenes valerenic acid and valepotriates, which inhibit GABA breakdown and cause smooth muscle relaxation, as well as lignans which inhibit serotonin binding. The action of these in concert may underlie behavioural effects. Similarly H. perforatum contains at least two widely studied neuro-active components: hyperforin and hypericin, however research has shown that the presence or absence of a simple flavonoid compound “rutin” significantly modulates the antidepressant effect of the plant.

A more relevant issue might be the extent to which botanical extracts used in behavioural research are (or have the potential to be) standardised. Translating and comparing the findings of one study to another without knowledge of any standardisation remains difficult, if not impossible, even when results appear consistent between studies. Even standardisation based on concentrations of one or several psychoactive components does not guarantee that there is batch-to-batch consistency or “phytoequivalence”, and this should be borne in mind when examining literature on herbal psychopharmacology.

1.2. Herbal psychotropic mechanisms of action

Both at the cellular and whole organism level, a plethora of molecular processes are involved in stress responses mediated by the CNS. Consequently many compounds may be active against a range of targets, all contributing to the observed effect. Given the complexity of psychiatric disorders (e.g. depression, anxiety or insomnia), modulation of single neurotransmitter target may not necessarily treat the patient as successfully as approaches that target multiple neuroendocrine systems. This is evidenced by the growing body of positive studies using adjunctive combinations of interventions to enhance efficacy in mood disorders.

Mechanisms of action for herbal medicines used for treatment of psychiatric disorders primarily involve modulation of neuronal communication, via specific plant metabolites binding to neurotransmitter/neuromodulator receptors, and via alteration of neurotransmitter synthesis and general function. Other actions may involve stimulating or sedating CNS activity, and regulating or supporting the healthy function of the endocrine system. Herbal medicines have a range of psychotherapeutic actions which may include antidepressant, anxiolytic, nootropic (cognitive enhancing), sedative, hypnotic and analgesic effects. Other traditionally viewed effects that may not follow standard terminology include “adaptogenic” and “tonic” actions, which are posited to provide increased adaptation to exogenous stressors via complex effects on neurochemistry and the endocrine system. Such actions may be clinically relevant to a range of psychiatric disorders, including mood, anxiety and sleep disorders, which are prevalent conditions. Similarly, the mechanisms of action underlying these disorders, while varied, still interface with each other, and often when certain underlying neurological, endocrine or circadian factors are treated, a beneficial effect may be observed in other domains. This may potentially impact the treatment of other comorbid psychiatric disorders e.g. if depression is treated then anxiety may resolve, or if insomnia is addressed then depression may be relieved.

One way to explore the psychopharmacological effects of herbal medicines and to increase their clinical validation is via the use of “omic” genetic technologies. Omics include pharmacogenomics, proteomics (epigenetics), and metabolomics. The use of omic technology in phytotherapy (field of herbal medicine) may be termed “herbomics”. Omic technologies may provide answers on pharmacodynamics, toxicity/safety, synergy effects, and clinical efficacy. One such application of omic technology is the testing of epigenetic effects of herbal medicines via proteomic assays. The results of two epigenetic studies conducted in the area of herbal psychopharmacology, reveal interesting effects. One study conducted gene expression tests in an animal model comparing 8 weeks of a single daily intravenous dose of imipramine, H. perforatum, or saline control. Results showed that the herb differentially regulated 66 genes and expression sequence tags, while imipramine regulated 74. Six common transcripts (concerning synaptic and energy metabolism functions) were expressed by both treatments. Another proteomic animal model study compared genetic protein expression in H. perforatum to the antidepressant clomipramine, and traditional Chinese medicine formulation “Xiao-yao-san” (XYS: used for mood disorders in Asia). From the 1616 protein spots analysed, H. perforatum was found to differentially express, in HT22 cells derived from mouse rat hippocampal cells, 64 proteins, XYS 40 proteins, and clomipramine 90 proteins. Mass spectrometry revealed that forty-three protein spots were found to have overlapping expressions, with the most affected involving energy metabolism. Western blotting analysis revealed that both the herb and clomipramine increased expression of two forms of DRP-2, a protein involved with axonal outgrowth and regeneration, while heat shock protein 70 (neuronal-protein folding gene) was also found to be increased. The significance of these studies is that they provide evidence that H. perforatum not only affects the transcription of many genes, but modulates similar genetic expressions to a conventional antidepressant. Future similar proteomic studies of other herbal psychotropics hold the promise of revealing similar genetic expressions common to conventional pharmacotherapies.

1.3. Aims of review

While other key reviews exist in the area of natural products and psychiatric disorders, these have either focused on an individual disorder e.g. anxiety, a specific plant medicine e.g. H. perforatum, or covered the area in a relatively cursory manner. None have provided a review of both the mechanistic underpinnings and clinical applications across a broad range of psychiatric disorders, nor calculated effect sizes for the clinical studies. So while research is increasing in the area of herbal psychopharmacology, to date no comprehensive review exists exploring the use of botanicals in the treatment of unipolar depression, anxiety disorders, and insomnia. These are highly comorbid and have common pathophysiological underpinnings, and as psychotropic herbal medicines exert an 4                                                                                                                                            J. Sarris et al.

array of psychopharmacological actions, it is of value to provide a review which encompasses these interrelated areas. Thus, in this novel paper we provide 1) a review of preclinical studies to provide a mechanistic understanding of the activity (or activities) of major psychotropic herbal medicines (to relate this to psychiatric applications), and 2) a systematic review of relevant randomised controlled clinical trials to identify and analyse current evidence (including calculation of effect sizes where possible).

## 2. Methods

A search of the electronic databases MEDLINE (PubMed), CINAHL, PsycINFO, and The Cochrane Library was conducted up to February 21st 2011 to review the evidence of herbal medicines with anxiolytic, antidepressant and hypnotic activity. Databases were searched firstly for in vitro and in vivo data on the mechanisms of action of major herbal medicines used commonly in modern phytotherapy. Next, a systematic search of controlled clinical trials using the search terms “Depression” OR “Major Depressive Disorder” OR “Anxiety” OR “Generalised Anxiety Disorder” OR “Panic Disorder” OR “Social Anxiety” OR “Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder” OR “Obsessive Compulsive Disorder” OR “Anxiety Disorder” OR “Insomnia” OR “Sleep Disorder” was combined with the search terms “Herbal Medicine” OR “Herb*” OR “Medicinal Plants” OR “Botanical Medicine” in addition to thirty individual herbal medicines (common names and Latin binomial names) e.g. “St John's wort” OR “Hypericum perforatum”. A forward search of key identified papers was subsequently performed using Web of Science cited reference search, in addition to hand-searching the literature. Papers that met the inclusion criteria for evidence of efficacy were human clinical trials using individual herbal medicines to treat mood, anxiety or sleep disorders. Specific inclusion criteria: 1) randomised and controlled trials (RCTs) i.e. using either an inert placebo or active comparator control (e.g. antidepressant), 2) have a total sample size of N10 (case studies were not included), 3) sufficient data available for analysis, and 4) be written in English. No criteria were set for gender, age, or ethnicity. All other papers that did not meet these criteria were excluded. As H. perforatum, P. methysticum, and V. officinalis have an abundance of studies, meta-analyses were primarily reviewed. An analysis of the type of evidence in the mechanisms of action tables was formed from review of pre-clinical and clinical evidence in the area, while traditional knowledge was assessed primarily via an established pharmacopoeia: King's Dispensatory. Analysis of the level of evidence in the clinical studies table was performed by the researchers, with disagreements resolved by mutual consensus. Levels of evidence were defined as: Level A—meta-analyses or replicated RCTs with positive results; Level B—one unreplicated RCT, or studies with mixed but mainly positive results; Level C—one or more clinical trials with poor methodology, or mixed or unsupportive evidence from clinical trials. Where sufficient data of the clinical trials where available, we calculated effect sizes as Cohen's d by firstly subtracting the differences in scores between placebo and intervention (between baseline and endpoint), then dividing this by the pooled baseline standard deviation. Post treatment standard deviations were used when baseline data was absent.

## 3. Results

### 3.1. Preclinical psychopharmacology

#### 3.1.1. Herbal antidepressants and depression
It is estimated that by the year 2020, depression will result in the second greatest increase in morbidity after cardiovascular disease, presenting a significant socioeconomic burden. The pathophysiology of major depressive disorder (MDD) is complex, and it appears that a variety of overlapping biological causations exist. In the last several decades, the main premise concerning the biopathophysiology of MDD has focused on monoamine impairment (dysfunction in monoamine expression and receptor activity), lowering of monoamine production, or secondary messenger (e.g. G proteins or cyclic AMP) system malfunction. In recent years, added attention has also focused on the role of neuro-endocrinological abnormalities involving cortisol excess and its impeding effects on neurogenesis via reducing brain-derived neurotropic factor, as well as impaired endogenous opioid function, changes in GABAergic and/or glutamatergic transmission, cytokine or steroidal alterations, and abnormal circadian rhythm. Several herbal medicines revealed an array of pre-clinical antidepressant activity, with seven being detailed in Table 1. Some antidepressant herbal medicines such as H. perforatum, Rhodiola rosea (roseroot), Crocus sativus (saffron) offer promise for the treatment of this disorder via known psychopharmacological actions including inhibition of monoamine re-uptake (such as serotonin, dopamine and noradrenaline), enhanced binding and sensitisation of serotonin receptors, monoamine oxidase inhibition, and neuro-endocrine modulation. Other effects may include GABAergic effects, cytokine modulation (especially in depressive disorders with a comorbid inflammatory condition), and opioid and cannabinoid system effects. In the case of most phytomedicines the antidepressant mechanisms of action are not as clearly defined as with SSRIs, having a multitude of biological effects on reuptake and receptor binding of various monoamines, commonly in addition to endocrine and psychoneuroimmunological modulation. Some herbal medicines with mood elevating effects (such as R. rosea and C. sativus) also display anxiolytic effects. This may be due to modulation of neurological pathways that have both antidepressant and anxiolytic effects (e.g. GABA, serotonin, and noradrenaline systems), or this may be due to a “halo effect” whereby when depression is effectively treated, anxiety may also be reduced. This was found in the case in a recent RCT involving participants with generalised anxiety, which found that P. methysticum (an established anxiolytic) in addition to anxiety reduction, also provided a statistically significant reduction of comorbid depression on the Montgomery–Asberg Depression Rating Scale.

#### 3.1.2. Herbal anxiolytics and anxiety
Anxiety disorders such as generalised anxiety disorder (GAD), social phobia, and post traumatic stress disorder present with a marked element of psychological anxiety and distress. The pathophysiology of anxiety disorders is still being unravelled, although current evidence indicates that the neurobiology involves abnormalities of serotonergic, noradrenergic, glutamatergic, and GABA-ergic transmission. The involvement of these pathways is reflected in the efficacy of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), selective serotonin and noradrenalin reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), and benzodiazepines. Table 1 Herbal antidepressants: mechanisms of action and clinical applications

| Herbal medicine                     | Mechanisms of action                                          | Type of evidence | Potential application | Major active constituents          |
|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|------------------|----------------------|------------------------------------|
| Borage (Echium amoenum)             | ⋄ (elevated plus maze test) Anxiolysis shown in an animal model | 1,2,3            | Depression            | thesinine, rosmarinic acid         |
|                                     | ⋄ currently unknown Antidepressant mechanism                |                  | Anxiety               |                                    |
| Lavender (Lavandula spp.)           | ⋄ (based on volatile constituents) GABA modulation          | 1,2,3            | Depression            | linalool, linayl acetate           |
|                                     | ⋄ models (elevated plus maze and open field tests)         |                  | Anxiety               |                                    |
| Korean ginseng (Panax ginseng)     | ⋄ Monoamine modulation HPA-axis modulation                  | 1,2,3            | Fatigue               | ginsenoside Rb1, ginsenoside Rg1  |
|                                     | ⋄ (dopamine, serotonin)                                     |                  | Depression            |                                    |
|                                     | ⋄ antioxidant effects Anti-inflammatory and inhibition      |                  | Poor cognition        |                                    |
| Mimosa (Albizia julibrissin)       | ⋄ 5-HT2c receptor binding affinity                           | 2,3              | Depression            | julibroside                        |
|                                     | ⋄ Antidepressant, anxiolytic effects in animal models      |                  | Anxiety               |                                    |
|                                     | ⋄ (elevated plus maze and tail suspension tests)           |                  | Insomnia              |                                    |
|                                     | ⋄ and increased sleep duration Significantly decreased sleep latency |                  |                      |                                    | |Herbal medicine|Mechanisms of action|Type of evidence|Potential application|Major active constituents|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Roseroot (Rhodiola rosea)|⋄ (inhibition of cortisol, stress-induced protein kinases, nitric oxide) ⋄ Monoamine modulation ⋄ Normalisation of 5-HT and anti-stress effects in animal depression models|1,2,3|Dep – Anx – Ins|Fatigue, Cognitive impairment, tyrosol, salidrosid, rosavin|
|Saffron (Crocus sativus)|⋄ (dopamine, norepinephrine, serotonin)↑Re-uptake inhibition of monoamines ⋄ GABA-α agonism ⋄ NMDA receptor antagonism ⋄ Anxiolytic effects in animal models|1,2,3|Dep 2,3 – Anx – Ins|crocin, safranal|
|St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum)|⋄ transmission via Na+ channel ⋄ Modulation of monoamine of serotonin, dopamine, norepinephrine ⋄ Nonselective inhibition of re-uptake ⋄ Increased binding/sensitivity/Decreased degradation of neurochemicals ⋄ Inhibited neuronal release of glutamate ⋄ Dopaminergic activity (prefrontal cortex) ⋄ Neuroendocrine modulation ⋄ Anti-depressant and anxiolytic activity in animal models|1,2,3|Dep 3 – Anx – Ins|hyperforin, hypericin|

1 Human clinical data, 2 Experimental evidence of activity, 3 Traditional systems of medicine and pharmacopoeias endorse use.
⁎ Dep = Depression, Anx = Anxiety, Ins = Insomnia. Table 2 Herbal anxiolytics: mechanisms of action and clinical applications

| Herbal medicine                     | Mechanisms of action                                                                                     | Evidence⁎ | Potential clinical application | Major active constituents          |
|-------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|-------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| Brahmi (Bacopa monniera)           | ⋄ Cholinesterase inhibition
⋄ Metal chelation/β-amyloid protection
⋄ 5HT2c modulation
⋄ Antioxidant effects
⋄ Antidepressant effects in forced swim and learned helplessness animal models | 2,3       | Dep
Anx
Ins              | bacoside A
bacoside P          |
| California poppy (Eschscholzia californica) | ⋄ (flumazenil antagonist)
⋄ Binding affinity with GABA receptors
⋄ Anxiolysis in animal models (familiar environment and anti-conflict tests) | –         | Anx
Ins
Pain            | escholidine
cheilanthifoline    |
| Chamomile (Matricaria recutita)    | ⋄ Modulates monoamine neurotransmission
⋄ Binding to GABA receptors
⋄ Neuroendocrine modulation | –         | Anx
Ins
Stress          | apigenin                           |
| Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba)              | ⋄ Antioxidant, anti-PAF, anti-inflammatory effects
⋄ Modulation of cholinergic and monoamine pathways
⋄ GABAergic effects
⋄ Nitric oxide activity | 2         | Cognitive impairment
Anx
Dep | ginkolide
bilobalide            |
| Gotu cola (Centella asiatica)      | ⋄ GABA transaminase inhibition
⋄ Animal models have shown anxiolytic effects (elevated plus maze, open field, social interaction tests)
⋄ Inhibition of acoustic startle response in human RCT | 3         | Anx
Stress
Cognitive impairment | asiaticoside                      |
| Kava (Piper methysticum)           | ⋄ GABA channel modulation (lipid membrane structure and sodium channel function)
⋄ Weak GABA binding (increased synergistic effect of [3H]muscimol binding to GABA-ɑ receptors) | 1,2,3     | Anx
Comorbid depression
Anxious insomnia | kawain
dihydrokawain           | Table 2 (continued)
| Herbal medicine                       | Mechanisms of action                                                      | Evidence⁎              | Potential clinical  | Major active constituents |
|--------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------|---------------------|--------------------------|
|                                      | ⋄ MAO-B inhibitionβ-adrenergic downregulation                           | Pain                   |                     |                          |
|                                      | ⋄ Re-uptake inhibition of norepinephrine in                             |                        |                     |                          |
|                                      | ⋄ the prefrontal cortex                                                  |                        |                     |                          |
|                                      |                                                                         |                        |                     |                          |
| Lemonbalm                            | ⋄ transaminase (GABA-T)Potent in vitro inhibitor of rat brain GABA     | 2,3                    | 1,2,3               | 3                        |
| (Melissa officinalis)               | ⋄ MAO-A inhibition                                                       |                        | Acute stress        |                          |
|                                      | ⋄ in self-rated calmness on a human stress tests                        |                        | Anxiety             |                          |
|                                      | Acute dosing caused a significant increase                                |                        | Depression          | geraniol                 |
|                                      |                                                                         |                        |                     | citranellal             |
|                                      |                                                                         |                        |                     |                          |
| Passionflower                        | ⋄ Benzodiazepine receptor partial agonist                                 | –                      | 1,2,3               | 1,3                      |
| (Passiflora spp.)                   | ⋄ GABA-system mediated anxiolysis                                         |                        | Anxiety             |                          |
|                                      | ⋄ Animal behavioural models have shown                                    |                        | Insomnia            | harman                   |
|                                      | ⋄ non-sedative anxiolytic effects                                        |                        |                     | chrysin                 |
|                                      | (elevated-plus maze, light/dark box choice tests)                       |                        |                     |                          |
|                                      |                                                                         |                        |                     |                          |
| Scullcap                             | ⋄ Posited GABA-α binding affinity                                         | 3                      | 1,2,3               | 3                        |
| (Scutellaria lateriflora)           | ⋄ Anxiolysis in animal maze-test model                                   |                        | Anxiety             |                          |
|                                      |                                                                         |                        | Nervous exhaustion   |                          |
|                                      |                                                                         |                        | Insomnia            | HOS                      |
|                                      |                                                                         |                        |                     | baicalin                |
|                                      |                                                                         |                        |                     | scutelaterin AOH        |
| Withania                             | GABA-mimetic activity                                                    | 2,3                    | 2,3                 | 3                        |
| (Withania somnifera)                | ⋄ (enhanced flunitrazepam binding)                                       |                        | Anxiety             | CH-OH                   |
|                                      | ⋄ by lorazepam in animal models                                          |                        | Insomnia            |                          |
|                                      | (elevated plus-maze, social interaction and feeding latency in an      |                        | Fatigue             | withanolide             |
|                                      | unfamiliar environment tests)                                            |                        | Nervous exhaustion   | withaferin              |
|                                      |                                                                         |                        |                     |                          |
| 1 Human clinical data, 2 Experimental evidence of activity, 3 Traditional systems of medicine and pharmacopoeias endorse use. |
| ⁎ Dep = Depression, Anx = Anxiety, Ins = Insomnia. | Herbal Psychopharmacology

In Table 2, ten herbal medicines with known anxiolytic effects are detailed. Phytotherapeutic interventions that may benefit anxiety disorders such as P. methysticum are classed as “anxiolytics”, and usually have effects on the GABA system, either via inducing ionic channel transmission by blockage of voltage-gates, or blockage, or through alteration of membrane structures, GABA transaminase or glutamic acid decarboxylase inhibition, or less commonly via binding with benzodiazepine receptor sites (e.g. the α subunit). Subsequent increased GABA neurotransmission has a damping effect of stimulatory pathways, which ultimately provides a psychologically calming effect.

A novel study was conducted to determine whether several common botanicals directly affected the primary brain enzymes responsible for GABA metabolism. In vitro rat brain homogenate assays revealed that, of the preparations assessed, the aqueous extract of Melissa officinalis (lemon balm) exhibited the greatest inhibition of GABA transaminase activity, while Matricaria recutita (chamomile) and Humulus lupulus (hops) showed significant inhibition of glutamic acid decarboxylase activity.

### Herbal hypnotics and insomnia
Insomnia is a common affliction in Western societies, with the prevalence of general sleep disturbance experienced by people over a year is estimated at approximately 85%, while the estimate of diagnosed primary insomnia is estimated at around 10%. The pathophysiology behind sleep disorders appears to involve “hyperarousal” of the neuroendocrine system caused by abnormalities in circadian rhythm (involving CLOCK genes, melatonin secretion, and adenosine receptors), GABA pathways, endocrine factors (high cortisol), and excitatory pathways involving glutamate and aspartate.

Herbal hypnotics and sedatives such as Valeriana spp. and H. lupulus are believed to work via modulation of adenosine receptors (for example antagonising the adenosine blocking effects of caffeine), melatonergic effects, or via GABAergic activity. Anxiolysis that occurs from GABA modulation may also have follow-on soporific effects (potentially in stress-induced insomnia). This may occur due to shared common pathways via a general down-regulation of neurological stimulatory activity. Due to this, plant medicines such as Zizyphus jujuba (sour date) and V. officinalis, while commonly used in phytotherapy for insomnia, can be both potentially also used to treat anxiety. This is reflected in the continuum that exists with sedating agents. As outlined, at one end of the sedation spectrum, substances that act as mild sedatives will cause relaxation and anxiolysis, while as the strength of the down-regulation of biological arousal increases, somnolence occurs, followed by marked sedation, coma and then death. While this continuum may be relevant to plants such as P. somniferum, it is not representative of many herbal anxiolytic/hypnotics, which while exerting a dose-dependent response, do not cause pronounced sedation. While only four hypnotic herbal medicines are detailed in Table 3, several other herbal medicines which are potentially beneficial for insomnia also exist, and are detailed in Table 2. These include Passiflora incanata (passionflower), Eschscholzia californica (California poppy), P. methysticum, and Scutellaria lateriflora (scullcap).

### Clinical evidence in depression, anxiety, and insomnia

#### Overview of results
A systematic search of the literature revealed 2975 papers (including preclinical and clinical studies, meta-analyses, reviews, and commentaries), of which 66 relevant RCTs (including studies in meta-analyses) involving eleven individual plant medicines merited final inclusion. Clinical study methodology (from controlled trials and meta-analyses) revealed typical treatment durations of between 4 and 8 weeks, and sample sizes of approximately 30–60 participants. Three phytomedicines displayed level A evidence; P. methysticum for generalised anxiety and H. perforatum and C. sativus for unipolar depression. Meta-analyses and systematic reviews of P. methysticum and H. perforatum revealed significant effects over placebo and comparable effects to synthetic agents. The majority of phytomedicines (six) had level B evidence, denoting that many single trials exist but that these are yet to be replicated, thus more RCTs are required to make firm conclusions. Four phytomedicines were found to have level C grade of evidence: Scutellaria officinalis for anxiety (positive but poor methodology), V. officinalis (mixed evidence) and P. incanata (positive result only on one outcome) for insomnia, and H. perforatum with no significant effect in obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) or social phobia.

#### Clinical evidence in depression
Several herbal medicines with antidepressant effects in preclinical models have been subjected to clinical trials. A recent meta-analysis of H. perforatum RCTs was conducted. Comparison of H. perforatum with placebo yielded a significant relative risk (RR) for response in favour of the active of 1.22 and a weighted mean difference between treatments of 1.33 points on the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAMD). Comparison with SSRIs yielded a non-significant difference between treatments for mean reduction in HAMD score from baseline. Importantly, a significant difference in favour of H. perforatum over conventional antidepressants for withdrawals due to adverse events was found: RR of 0.53. The results of this meta-analysis is comparable to another meta-analysis which provided a RR of 1.48 from 18 combined studies for response versus placebo, and an equivocal effect with synthetic antidepressants (SSRIs) RR 1.00. A recent long-term follow-up study involving 426 responders to extract WS 5570 were assessed for remission rates after continuation of 26 weeks of randomised WS 5570 (300 mg three times a day standardised to between 3 and 6% hyperforin and not less than 6% flavonoids) or placebo. Results revealed a relapse rate for completers of 18% compared to 25.7% for placebo. Average relapse time for SJW was 14 days longer compared to placebo, which while statistically significant, is still a modest result. Standardisation and quality is an issue of note with SJW, as extracts show variability of efficacy potentially due to different constituent profiles. Due to this, results using high quality European pharmaceutical grade extracts cannot be transferred to some inferior extracts. Table 3 Herbal hypnotics: mechanisms of action and clinical applications.

| Herbal medicine                | Mechanisms of action                                                     | Evidence⁎ | Potential | Major active constituents                |
|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|-----------|------------------------------------------|
| Chaste tree                   | ⋄ via increased melatonin secretion                                    | 1,2,3     | —         | casticin, vitexin                       |
| (Vitex agnus castus)         | Circadian rhythm modulation                                            |           |           |                                          |
|                               | (dose-dependent effect that may benefit sleep latency insomnia)        |           |           |                                          |
|                               | (Dericks-Tan et al., 2003)                                           |           |           |                                          |
| Hops                          | ⋄ (binding affinity to M1 and M2 receptors)                           | –         | 2,3       | humulone, lupulone, xanthohumol         |
| (Humulus lupulus)            | Melatonin receptor modulation                                          | 1,2,3     | Insomnia   |                                          |
|                               | ⋄ (Abourashed et al., 2004; Brattstrom, 2007; Butterweck et al., 2007)|           |           |                                          |
| Sour date                     | ⋄ in the hippocampus                                                  | –         | 2,3       | jujuboside A, jujuboside B              |
| (Zizyphus jujuba)            | Inhibits glutamate-mediated pathways                                    | 2,3       | Insomnia   |                                          |
|                               | ⋄ when given orally in rats                                           |           |           |                                          |
|                               | Jujubosides increased total sleep time                                 |           |           |                                          |
|                               | ⋄ formula containing Z. jujuba as the principle herb has found       |           |           |                                          |
|                               | modulation of central monoamines and limbic system interaction         |           |           |                                          |
|                               | (Cao et al., 2010; Chen et al., 1985; Hsieh et al., 1986a; Hsieh et al., 1986b; Morishita et al., 1987) | | | |
| Valerian                      | ⋄ GABA modulation (increased binding and decreased degradation of GABA)| 3         | 2,3       | valerenic acid, valepotriate            |
| (Valeriana spp.)             | Adenosine (A1 receptor) interactions                                   | 1,2,3     | Insomnia   |                                          |
|                               | ⋄ demonstrated GABA-A receptor (β3 subunit) agonism                  |           |           |                                          |
|                               | ⋄ Animal models have shown anxiolytic effects                         |           |           |                                          |
|                               | (elevated plus maze)                                                 |           |           |                                          |
|                               | (Benke et al., 2009; Dietz et al., 2005; Murphy et al., 2009; Ortiz et al., 1999; Sichardt et al., 2007; Trauner et al., 2008) | | | |
| 1 Human clinical data, 2 Experimental evidence of activity, 3 Traditional systems of medicine and pharmacopoeias endorse use. | | | | |
| ⁎ Dep = Depression, Anx = Anxiety, Ins = Insomnia. | | | | | |Herbal medicine|First author|Methodology|Results#|Evidence level|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Borage (Echium amoenum)|(Sayyah et al., 2006)|Depression: 6-week RCT (n=35) using 375mg of Borage vs. placebo|Statistically significant reduction versus placebo on HAMD at week but this was not maintained at week 6. No significant effect on HAMA|B|
|Borage (Echium amoenum)|(Sayyah et al., 2009a)|OCD: 6-week RCT (n=44) using 500mg/day of Borage vs. placebo|Borage significantly reduced OCD symptoms over placebo on Y-BOCS at endpoint, in addition to significantly reducing HAMA rated anxiety|B|
|Chamomile (Matricaria recutita)|(Amsterdam et al., 2009)|Anxiety: 8-week RCT (n=57) using standardised Chamomile extract (220mg-1100mg of titrated, depending on response) vs. placebo tablets|Chamomile significantly reduced participant's anxiety scores on HAMA compared to placebo at the end of eight weeks of treatment|B|
|Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba)|(Woelk et al., 2007)|Anxiety: 4-week RCT (n=107) 240mg, 480mg Ginkgo extract EGb761 vs. placebo|Dose-dependent significant reduction of anxiety over placebo of 2.2 and 6.5 points on HAMA for 480mg and 240mg doses of EGb 761, respectively|B|
|Kava (Piper methysticum)|(Pittler and Ernst, 2003)|Anxiety: Review of 11 RCTs (N=645) and a meta-analysis of 6 RCTs (N=345)|Significantly greater anxiolysis from Kava than placebo; 5.0 point reduction over placebo on HAMA (95% CI: 1.1–8.8)|A|
|Kava (Piper methysticum)|(Witte et al., 2005)|Anxiety: Meta-analysis Kava WS1490 extract 6 RCTs included|Odds ratio in favour of Kava= 3.3 (95% CI: 2.09–5.22)| |
|Lavender (Lavandula spp.)|(Akhondzadeh et al., 2003)|Depression: 4-week RCT (n=45) using Lavender tincture (1:5 50% alcohol, 60 drops) vs. imipramine, or the combination|Imipramine was more effective than Lavender. The addition of Lavender to imipramine was more effective in reducing HAMD rated depression than imipramine alone, indicating a synergistic effect|B~|
|Passionflower (Passiflora incarnata)|(Akhondzadeh et al., 2001)|Anxiety: 4-week RCT (n=36) using 45 drops of Passionflower vs. 30mg of oxazepam|Passionflower was as effective (with less side effects) as oxazepam in reducing anxiety|B|
|Passionflower (Passiflora incarnata)|(Movafegh et al., 2008)|Anxiety: Acute study RCT (n=60) using 500mg of Passionflower vs. placebo for pre-surgical anxiety|Anxiety scores were significantly lower in the passionflower group than in the control group on a numerical rating scale| |
|Passionflower (Passiflora incarnata)|(Ngan and Conduit, 2011)|Insomnia: 3-week RCT (n=41) using 2g of Passionflower tea vs. placebo (parsley) tea before sleep|Aside from an improvement between groups on subjective sleep quality, no significant differences were found on other sleep outcomes|C|
|Roseroot (Rhodiola rosea)|(Darbinyan et al., 2007)|Depression: 6-week 3-arm RCT (n=89) comparing 340mg vs 680mg of standardised Roseroot vs. placebo|Both Roseroot groups has significant reduction on HAMD significant and on insomnia, somatisation and emotional instability subscale outcome measures|B| |Herbal medicine|First author|Methodology|Results#|Evidence level|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Saffron (Crocus sativus)|(Akhondzadeh et al., 2005)|Depression: Five 6-week RCTs:|Significant improvement for depression over placebo on HAMD for Saffron petals and stamen|A|
| |(Moshiri et al., 2006)|Two trials using 30–90 mg of Saffron vs. placebo;|An equivalent therapeutic response occurred with Saffron vs. imipramine and fluoxetine on HAMD depression| |
| |(Akhondzadeh et al., 2004)|Three trials using Saffron vs. synthetic antidepressants| | |
| |(Noorbala et al., 2005)| | | |
| |(Akhondzadeh et al., 2007)| | | |
|Scullcap (Scutellaria lateriflora)|(Wolfson and Hoffmann, 2003)|Anxiety: Acute cross-over RCT (n=19) using Scullcap vs. placebo|Scullcap dose-dependently reduced symptoms of anxiety and tension after acute administration compared with placebo|C|
|St John's wort: SJW (Hypericum perforatum)|(Rahimi et al., 2009)|Depression: Meta-analysis|RR 1.22 (95% CI: 1.03, 1.45) for clinical response (four studies)|A|
| | |SJW vs. placebo|Significantly greater reduction over placebo of 1.33 points (95% CI: 1.15, 1.51) on HAMD (three studies)| |
| | |13 RCTs|SJW showed an effect comparable to synthetics| |
| |(Linde et al., 2008)|Depression: Meta-analyses|SJW showed a significant effect on HAMD vs. placebo| |
| | |18 RCTs (N=3064)|RR 1.48 (95% CI: 1.23, 1.77)| |
| |(Kobak et al., 2005a)|OCD: 12-week RCT (n=60) comparing SJW (600mg-1800mg) vs. placebo|No significant result occurred between treatments|C|
| |(Kobak et al., 2005b)|Social Phobia: 12-week RCT (n=40) using SJW (600mg-1800mg) vs. placebo|No significant result occurred between treatments on Y-BOCS, nor on response rates|C|
|Valerian (Valeriana spp.)|(Bent et al., 2006)|Insomnia: Systematic review 16 RCTs (N=1093)|Six studies included in meta-analysis revealed significantly improved quality over placebo on the dichotomous outcome of sleep quality (RR of improved sleep = 1.8, 95% CI: 1.2, 2.9)|C|
| | |and meta-analysis. Valerian vs. placebo or vs. active controls|However the review revealed 9/16 studies revealed no positive outcomes| |
| | |Valerian reduced sleep latency over placebo by only 0.70 min|(95% CI −3.44, 4.83), with the standardised mean differences between the groups measured being statistically equivocal| |
| |(Fernandez-San-Martin et al., 2010)|Insomnia: Systematic review and meta-analysis of 18 RCTs, Valerian vs. placebo or active controls| | |

Level A: Meta-analyses or replicated RCTs with positive results
Level B: One unreplicated RCT, or mixed but mainly positive results
Level C: One or more clinical trials with poor methodology, or consistent mixed or unsupportive evidence.
RR: relative risk ~ Evidence-based on Lavender as an adjuvant rather than as a monotherapy, HAMD: Hamilton Depression Rating Scale, HAMA: Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale, Y-BOCS: Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale.
# “Significant” is p b 0.05.
^ Two 1-week crossover periods, with a 1-week washout between. H. perforatum has better tolerability over some conventional antidepressants, as demonstrated by Kasper et al. comparative analysis between paroxetine and Hypericum extract WS 5570, which revealed 10 to 38 fold higher adverse events rate for the synthetic comparator. While concerns exist over interactions of H. perforatum with pharmaceuticals, it should be noted that this mainly concerns high hyperforin extracts. This is reflected in a systematic review of 19 studies that showed that high-dose hyperforin extracts (N10 mg/day) had outcomes consistent with CYP3A induction, while studies using low-dose hyperforin extracts (b4 mg/day) demonstrated no significant effect on CYP3A (thereby lessening the chance of increased metabolism of many common drugs).

Two RCTs using 60–90 mg of concentrated C. sativus extract demonstrated significant improvement of depression over placebo on the HAMD. The Akhondzadeh et al. RCT using the stamen had a large effect size of d = 1.51, while the Moshiri et al. study which used the cheaper petals revealed a similar large effect size of d = 1.78. Equivalent effects on HAMD occurred in three RCTs comparing C. sativus to imipramine and fluoxetine. Clinical trials have detailed anxiety, tachycardia, nausea, dyspepsia and changes in appetite as possible side effects (non-significant statistical trend against placebo). This reflects traditional knowledge of adverse reactions. Although the results are encouraging, limitations exist in confirming efficacy. Trial lengths are commonly short (4–6 weeks), sample sizes are small (n = 30–40). Potential bias also exists, due to the same fraternity of researchers conducting the only human clinical trials. Other institutions are encouraged to validate this research, as C. sativus appears to be a promising antidepressant.

Only one human clinical trial was located evaluating Echium amoenum in the treatment of depression. Results revealed that the herb was superior to placebo in reducing depression on the HAMD at week four of a study with an effect size d of 0.92, however this result was not maintained at week 6. E. amoenum also revealed no significant anxiolytic activity on the HAMA over placebo. This plant is currently scheduled in Australia due to the pyrrolizidine alkaloids. In this study the only notable difference between side effects of the herb and placebo groups were increased dry mouth in the active group (seven participants: 41%), although this was non-significant. One clinical trial compared Lavandula spp. against imipramine and the combination in patients with MDD. Results revealed that although Lavandula spp. was not as effective as its synthetic counterpart, the combination of both was more effective than imipramine alone, indicating a synergistic effect.

Currently there is only one readily accessible study on R. rosea for depression, as previous research on its putative antidepressant activity are Russian in origin, and the original papers could not be obtained for this review. A three-arm study using R. rosea SHR-5 standardised extract (340 mg and 680 mg/day) against placebo in the treatment of mild-moderate depressive disorder revealed a significant dose-dependent improvement occurred in the active groups compared with placebo. Effect sizes were large for both treatment groups, however conclusion from these strong results should be tempered as there was an unusually low response to placebo and a rather small standard deviation, which is not typical for trials using antidepressant compounds. Although promising, confidence in the use of R. rosea to treat MDD cannot be established until more rigorous RCTs are undertaken.

### Clinical evidence in anxiety

Several promising anxiolytics with traditional evidence as relaxants have been studied in clinical trials (see Table 4). A Cochrane review and meta-analysis of seven RCTs using P. methysticum in various anxiety disorders revealed a statistically significant mean reduction of 3.9 points on the Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAMA) over placebo (95% CI: 0.1, 7.7). A recent pooled analysis of P. methysticum studies in English, including a newly published positive study, revealed a similar conclusion, with a positive result occurring in four out of six studies reviewed (mean pooled Cohen's d = 1.10). Not all studies however are positive, with a methodologically rigorous 4 week GAD study (n = 37) finding no significant difference between a standardised kava extract and placebo.

P. methysticum was withdrawn from European and UK markets in 2002 due to concerns over reported hepatotoxicity. Research has been conducted over recent years to determine the pathogenesis, and present understanding of factors potentially responsible for hepatotoxicity include incorrect cultivar being used, individuals' hepatic insufficiency to metabolise kavalactones, preparations made using acetonic or ethanolic media low in glutathione, potentially contaminated or poorly stored material, and use of aerial parts or root peelings which are higher in alkaloids. Due to this, use of only the peeled roots from noble cultivars using a water solute extraction method is advised.

S. lateriflora has been studied in one clinical trial to examine its anxiolytic activity. A clinical trial revealed that acute administration of the herb dose-dependently attenuated anxiety and tension on a numerical rating scale. However, the methodology was poor and quantitative results on the outcome measures were not clearly elucidated (thereby precluding the calculation of an effect size). A pilot RCT using P. incanata extract revealed equivocal efficacy to oxazepam (30 mg/day) in reducing anxiety, with fewer side effects. A non-statistical trend towards decreased sedation and impaired job performance occurred in the herbal medicine group. While the results are positive, no definitive conclusion can be reached, as anxiety conditions are notorious for high placebo response, and no placebo arm was used. An acute study using P. incanata against placebo control for pre-surgical anxiety revealed a significant reduction of anxiety in favour of the herb on a numerical rating scale (d = 1.30). Importantly, no difference in the anaesthetic sedation levels occurred between groups. Analysis of side effects of P. incanata studies in a Cochrane Review revealed no current evidence of any safety concerns with the plant.

A recent RCT was conducted using a flexible dose of M. recutita in patients with diagnosed GAD and a moderate level of anxiety. Results revealed a significant effect in favour 14                                                                                                                                           J. Sarris et al.

of the intervention with a large effect size d = 0.90. No significant adverse reactions were found in the M. recutita group, even with higher doses. An RCT using Ginkgo biloba (ginkgo) EGb 761 extract (480 mg or 240 mg/day) or placebo in patients with GAD and adjustment disorder with anxious mood, revealed a significant dose-dependent reduction on the HAMA over placebo in both groups. Effects sizes for GAD were large in both the 480 mg/day group (d = 1.14), and the 240 mg/day group (d = 0.76). While increased idiosyncratic bleeding time has been documented in rare case studies, the herb is regarded as having a good safety profile.

Aside from application in depression, H. perforatum has been studied for use in social phobia and OCD. In one controlled study, participants with a primary diagnosis of OCD were randomised to 12 weeks of treatment of H. perforatum (flexible dosing 600 mg–1800 mg depending on response) or matching placebo. Results revealed that the mean reduction on the Yale–Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS) in the active group (−3.43) did not significantly differ from the placebo group (−3.60). Significant differences were also not found on any of the Y-BOCS subscales. A recent 6-week controlled study used the dried flower of E. amoenum versus placebo in patients with diagnosed OCD. Results revealed that while no significant effect occurred in the first weeks, a significant difference between the active and placebo on Y-BOCS and HAMA scores occurred at endpoint. However it should be noted that participants in both groups experienced only a slight reduction of OCD symptoms (five to six points on Y-BOCS). There was no significant difference between the two groups in terms of side effects, excepting an increase in constipation in the placebo group (potentially due to the use of talcum powder as an excipient). In social phobia one controlled study using an herbal medicine was found. A placebo-controlled pilot study testing H. perforatum (flexible-dose 600–1800 mg daily) in participants with social phobia (assessed via the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale), found no significant differential benefit over placebo, although a trend towards improvement was demonstrated.

Many of the anxiolytic plant medicines reviewed have potential additional applications. These include improving mood (M. officinalis or P. methysticum), providing a sedative or hypnotic action for insomnia (P. incanata or S. lateriflora), reducing muscle tension or pain (E. californica), or enhancing cognition via nootropic activities (Bacopa monniera: brahmi or G. biloba). Herbal medicines (such as Withania somnifera: withania, and Centella asiatica: gotu kola) may also provide an adaptogenic effect applicable in cases of comorbid fatigue.

## Clinical evidence in insomnia

V. officinalis is the only botanical with sufficient research of adequate rigour in the area of insomnia (aside from a recently conducted isolated study using P. incanata). Meta-analyses and reviews reveal that the evidence concerning the soporific plant medicine is quite varied, and currently does not support its use in treating insomnia. The meta-analysis, which included 16 eligible RCTs on Valeriana spp. monotherapy or in combination with other herbal medicines, found that 9 out of 16 studies did not have positive outcomes in regard to improvement of sleep quality. Another meta-analysis of 18 RCTs found that Valeriana spp. interventions reduced sleep latency over placebo by only 0.70 min, with the standardised mean differences between the groups measured being statistically equivocal. The safety profile of Valeriana spp. appears good, however traditional pharmacopoeias caution it as a “cerebral stimulant”, thus it may not consistently provide somnolence. A recent 2 week crossover RCT (two 1-week phases with a 1-week washout in between) was conducted using P. incanata tea (2 g) versus a parsley placebo tea in healthy volunteers. Results revealed that differences at the conclusion of the active and placebo week of treatment were only significant (in favour of P. incanata) on the outcome of subjective sleep quality, with an effect size d of 0.44 (rated via sleep diary). No significant effects were found between treatments for total sleep time, sleep latency, sleep efficiency, or feeling of refreshment. Major flaws of this study included the lack of baseline measurement, non-standardisation of P. incanata, and short duration of treatment with a low once per day dose. Thus these results do not clearly inform on efficacy.

## Discussion

As this review details, there is a growing abundance of preclinical and clinical studies which reveal a range of complex psychotropic activity from herbal medicines potentially beneficial for treating depression, anxiety and sleep disorders. However several caveats exist in being over-enthused by the current field of herbal psychopharmacology. Concerns exist over poor reporting of data in some studies, and the many unreplicated studies with small samples. Regarding study replication, only three herbal medicines reviewed have multiple replicated RCTs that have been analysed via meta-analysis (H. perforatum, P. methysticum, and V. officinalis). Another potential issue is that many herbal medicines with in vitro evidence have not yet been rigorously tested in robust human studies. As detailed in the mechanisms of action and clinical evidence tables, several herbal medicines (10 out of 21) that have in vitro or in vivo evidence of pharmacodynamic effects, have not been studied as monotherapies in human clinical trials. Regardless, an important consideration is that in vivo, plant constituents undergo significant metabolism via enzymatic and hepatic processes, being biotransformed into new chemical structures. Thus in vitro evidence cannot always be extrapolated to clinical efficacy in humans. A further consideration is that while studies conducted in Europe using P. methysticum or H. perforatum have often been positive, these results are not always replicated in countries such as the United States. In the case of H. perforatum, recent trials have revealed smaller effect sizes, thereby newer meta-analytic studies have provided weaker results than previous ones. This also mirrors the “modest” result of a recent meta-analysis of antidepressants in MDD of mild to moderate severity, which revealed a Cohen's d effect size of 0.20. Herbal medicines such as Albizia julibrissin (Mimosa), M. officinalis, Z. jujuba, and E. californica have been researched over the past three decades in preclinical models with positive results, however surprisingly these have not been studied as monotherapies in the treatment of psychiatric disorders. Preclinical evidence in these phytomedicines reveals an array. # Herbal Psychopharmacology

of monoamine and neuropeptide modulatory activity that have potential to benefit sufferers of depression, anxiety and insomnia. Although, as stated above, positive in vitro or animal models do not always translate into clinical efficacy in humans, this information does provide a guidepost to potential future research. Promising anxiolytics that to date have not been tested as monotherapies by RCTs for anxiety disorders include B. monniera, E. calfornica, M. officinalis, and W. somnifera. Promising antidepressants include Panax ginseng (Korean ginseng), and A. julibrissin; while H. lupulus and Z. jujuba should be studied in the treatment of insomnia. It is interesting to note that while the plant medicines reviewed in this paper are used in modern phytotherapeutic practice to treat anxiety, depression, and insomnia, some have specific applications that may be utilised for complex conditions. For example B. monniera is considered beneficial in treating cognitive insufficiency; E. californica has been used for insomnia and pain; M. officinalis is used for gastrointestinal complaints e.g. nervous dyspepsia; while W. somnifera and P. ginseng are regarded as “tonics” that via neuroendocrine modulation may allay fatigue.

In addition to exploring promising individual psychotropics for range of psychiatric disorders, future research could centre on combinations of various botanicals with preclinical and clinical evidence of activity. While gold standard methodology will usually be in the form of an RCT using a monotherapy, combination formulations may also be of merit. Such an example is found in a large, open label practice-orientated study, using a combination of H. perforatum and V. officinalis to treat depression co-occurring with anxiety. The results demonstrated marked success for the herbal combination which ameliorated anxiety more effectively than H. perforatum monotherapy. It should be noted however that not all combination studies are positive. A 4 week 2009 RCT using a combination of H. perforatum and P. methysticum for the treatment of MDD with comorbid anxiety had mixed results. Although there was significant relief of self-reported depression on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II) over placebo in the first controlled phase, no effects were found in the pooled analysis or on anxiety outcomes. Regardless, other potential combinations exist that may be beneficial in the treatment of depression. Formulations involving combinations of R. rosea, C. sativus, A. julibrissin, and H. perforatum may provide increased synergistic antidepressant effects for treatment of depression. In the treatment of anxiety, novel formulations including P. incanata, S. lateriflora, in combination with P. methysticum may prove beneficial. While further research using Z. jujuba and Vitex agnus castus (chaste tree) in combination with other hypnotics may also provide benefit in insomnia. These combinations do exist commonly in over-the-counter herbal medicine products, however at present a paucity of research has been conducted to validate claims of efficacy. This remains a research area of great potential.

Currently, a lack of “bioequivalence” between extracts studied hampers the advancement of botanicals as viable mainstream medicines. While medicinal plants, or their combinations, have a multi-target polyvalent and synergistic mechanism of action (due to a complex mixture of active constituents), this potential strength also brings with it associated potential drawbacks. It is challenging to evaluate evidence of efficacy and safety due to differing bioequivalence between preparations used in the clinical trials. When results of different clinical studies are not consistent this limitation must be taken in consideration. Results derived from different herbal preparations produced by different manufactures (with differing bioequivalence) have not currently been evaluated. Evaluation and clinical assessment of efficacy of medicinal plants in general is a complicated task, with the chemical composition of herbal preparation dependant on many factors, such as: genetic differences (phytochemical variability); environmental differences (climate, temperature, light, and rain); soil quality (pH, fertilisation, and heavy metals); exposure to airborne vectors (insects, pests, and microbiological infection raw material production); differences in plant parts used (root, bark, leaf, fruit, etc.); harvest time (before, during, and after flowering time); and preparation methods (from storage to extraction and manufacture). Consequently, it is very difficult to produce standardised extracts with reproducible chemical composition, and consequently with reproducible pharmacological activity, particularly when extracts are produced by different manufacturers. While preclinical studies of main active constituents are helpful, the evidence cannot guarantee the same efficacy of total extract in replicated batches. This remains an area of concern, with future genetic “herbomic” studies potentially assisting in providing greater assurance of bioequivalence.

Future “herbomic” trials have the potential to greatly advance the field of herbal psychopharmacology, and should explore various different domains such as 1) Specific neurochemical pathways implicated in the pathogenesis of psychiatric disorders, and the phytomedicines which are known to affect these pathways, 2) Cytochrome P450 and P-glycoprotein polymorphisms which effect the metabolisation of the herbal medicine's active constituent and 3) Epigenetic differences affected between single active constituents versus whole extracts and complex prescriptive formulas. The nascent field of “herbomics” has the potential to provide over the coming years increased validation of the psychotropic effects of herbal medicines. As our knowledge advances in this area, herbal formulas may be personalised to take into account an individual's neurological and hepatic polymorphisms, and can monitor the epigenetic effects that occur in the person. Epigenetic studies can be used as a “proof of concept” in psychiatry, to show that whole extracts have specific affects on gene transcription that may be aligned with conventional pharmacotherapies. Furthermore, investigations of individualised prescriptions may demonstrate unique epigenetic effects.

In conclusion, while the literature reviewed in this paper provides encouraging evidence for the use of herbal medicines in the treatment of depression, anxiety and insomnia, further research utilising robust methodology, pharmaceutical good manufacturing practice and the use of biotechnologies to ensure bioequivalence of product, and greater application of genetic technologies, is still required to promote confidence in this area. This will provide the next significant step in the field of herbal psychopharmacology. J. Sarris et al.

fellowship (NHMRC funding ID 628875), in a strategic partnership with The University of Melbourne and Swinburne University of Technology.

Contributors

All authors contributed to the design, writing and proofing of the manuscript.

Conflicts of Interest

No conflicts of interest noted.

Acknowledgements

Dr. Jerome Sarris is funded by an Australian National Health & Medical Research Council fellowship (NHMRC funding ID 628875), in a strategic partnership with The University of Melbourne and the National Institute of Complementary Medicine Collaborative Centre for the Study of Neurocognition at Swinburne University of Technology. Thanks are extended to Genevieve Houghton for assistance with formatting the manuscript.

References

| Author(s) | Year | Title | Journal | Volume | Pages |
|-----------|------|-------|---------|--------|-------|
| Abourashed, E.A., Koetter, U., Brattstrom, A. | 2004 | In vitro binding experiments with a Valerian, hops and their fixed combination extract (Ze91019) to selected central nervous system receptors. | Phytomedicine | 11 | 633–638 |
| Akhondzadeh, S., Naghavi, H.R., Vazirian, M., Shayeganpour, A., Rashidi, H., Khani, M. | 2001 | Passionflower in the treatment of generalized anxiety: a pilot double-blind randomized controlled trial with oxazepam. | J. Clin. Pharm. Ther. | 26 | 363–367 |
| Akhondzadeh, S., Kashani, L., Fotouhi, A., Jarvandi, S., Mobaseri, M., Moin, M., Khani, M., Jamshidi, A.H., Baghalian, K., Taghizadeh, M. | 2003 | Comparison of Lavandula angustifolia Mill. tincture and imipramine in the treatment of mild to moderate depression: a double-blind, randomized trial. | Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry | 27 | 123–127 |
| Akhondzadeh, S., Fallah-Pour, H., Afkham, K., Jamshidi, A.H., Khalighi-Cigaroudi, F. | 2004 | Comparison of Crocus sativus L. and imipramine in the treatment of mild to moderate depression: a pilot double-blind randomized trial. | BMC Complement. Altern. Med. | 4 | 12 |
| Akhondzadeh, S., Tahmacebi-Pour, N., Noorbala, A.A., Amini, H., Fallah-Pour, H., Jamshidi, A.H., Khani, M. | 2005 | Crocus sativus L. in the treatment of mild to moderate depression: a double-blind, randomized and placebo-controlled trial. | Phytother. Res. | 19 | 148–151 |
| Akhondzadeh, B., Moshiri, E., Noorbala, A., Jamshidi, A., Abbasi, S., Akhondzadeh, S. | 2007 | Comparison of petal of Crocus sativus L. and fluoxetine in the treatment of depressed outpatients: a pilot double-blind randomized trial. | Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry | 30 | 439–442 |
| American Psychiatric Association | 2000 | Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th ‘Text Revision’ ed. | American Psychiatric Association | | |
| Amsterdam, J.D., Li, Y., Soeller, I., Rockwell, K., Mao, J.J., Shults, J. | 2009 | A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of oral Matricaria recutita (chamomile) extract therapy for generalized anxiety disorder. | J. Clin. Psychopharmacol. | 29 | 378–382 |
| Antonijevic, I.A. | 2006 | Depressive disorders — is it time to endorse different pathophysiologies? | Psychoneuroendocrinology | 31 | 1–15 | Herbal Psychopharmacology

| Author(s) | Year | Title | Journal | Volume | Pages |
|-----------|------|-------|---------|--------|-------|
| Cao, J.X., Zhang, Q.Y., Cui, S.Y., Cui, X.Y., Zhang, J., Zhang, Y.H., Bai, Y.J., Zhao, Y.Y. | 2010 | Hypnotic effect of jujubosides from Semen Ziziphi Spinosae | J. Ethnopharmacol. | 130 | 163–166 |
| Chang, Y., Wang, S.J. | 2010 | Hypericin, the active component of St. John's wort, inhibits glutamate release in the rat cerebrocortical synaptosomes via a mitogen-activated protein kinase-dependent pathway | Eur. J. Pharmacol. | 634 | 53–61 |
| Chen, X. | 1996 | Cardiovascular protection by ginsenosides and their nitric oxide releasing action | Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. | 23 | 728–732 |
| Chen, H.C., Hsieh, M.T., Lai, E. | 1985 | Studies on the suanzaorentang in the treatment of anxiety | Psychopharmacology Berl | 85 | 486–487 |
| Chen, Q.G., Zeng, Y.S., Qu, Z.Q., Tang, J.Y., Qin, Y.J., Chung, P., Wong, R., Hagg, U. | 2009 | The effects of Rhodiola rosea extract on 5-HT level, cell proliferation and quantity of neurons at cerebral hippocampus of depressive rats | Phytomedicine | 16 | 830–838 |
| Cho, S.M., Shimizu, M., Lee, C.J., Han, D.S., Jung, C.K., Jo, J.H., Kim, Y.M. | 2010 | Hypnotic effects and binding studies for GABA (A) and 5-HT(2C) receptors of traditional medicinal plants used in Asia for insomnia | J. Ethnopharmacol. | 132 | 225–232 |
| Cohen, J. | 1988 | Statistical Power Analyses for the Behavioral Sciences | Erlbaum | - | - |
| Comer, J.S., Olfson, M., Mojtabai, R. | 2010 | National trends in child and adolescent psychotropic polypharmacy in office-based practice, 1996–2007 | J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry | 49 | 1001–1010 |
| Connor, K.M., Davidson, J.R. | 2002 | A placebo-controlled study of Kava kava in generalized anxiety disorder | Int. Clin. Psychopharmacol. | 17 | 185–188 |
| Dang, H., Chen, Y., Liu, X., Wang, Q., Wang, L., Jia, W., Wang, Y. | 2009 | Antidepressant effects of ginseng total saponins in the forced swimming test and chronic mild stress models of depression | Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry | 33 | 1417–1424 |
| Darbinyan, V., Aslanyan, G., Amroyan, E., Gabrielyan, E., Malmstrom, C., Panossian, A. | 2007 | Clinical trial of Rhodiola rosea L. extract SHR-5 in the treatment of mild to moderate depression | Nord. J. Psychiatry | 61 | 343–348 |
| Davies, L.P., Drew, C.A., Duffield, P., Johnston, G.A., Jamieson, D.D. | 1992 | Kava pyrones and resin: studies on GABAA, GABAB and benzodiazepine binding sites in rodent brain | Pharmacol. Toxicol. | 71 | 120–126 |
| Dericks-Tan, J.S., Schwinn, P., Hildt, C. | 2003 | Dose-dependent stimulation of melatonin secretion after administration of Agnus castus | Exp. Clin. Endocrinol. Diabetes | 111 | 44–46 |
| Dhawan, K., Kumar, S., Sharma, A. | 2001a | Anti-anxiety studies on extracts of Passiflora incarnata Linneaus | J. Ethnopharmacol. | 78 | 165–170 |
| Dhawan, K., Kumar, S., Sharma, A. | 2001b | Anxiolytic activity of aerial and underground parts of Passiflora incarnata | Fitoterapia | 72 | 922–926 |
| Dhawan, K., Kumar, S., Sharma, A. | 2002 | Comparative anxiolytic activity profile of various preparations of Passiflora incarnata Linneaus: a comment on medicinal plants' standardization | J Altern Complement Med | 8 | 283–291 |
| Di Renzo, G. | 2000 | Ginkgo biloba and the central nervous system | Fitoterapia | 71 (Suppl 1) | S43–S47 |
| Dietz, B.M., Mahady, G.B., Pauli, G.F., Farnsworth, N.R. | 2005 | Valerian extract and valerenic acid are partial agonists of the 5-HT5a receptor in vitro | Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res. | 138 | 191–197 |
| Elkins, G., Rajab, M.H., Marcus, J. | 2005 | Complementary and alternative medicine use by psychiatric inpatients | Psychol. Rep. | 96 | 163–166 |
| Fahmi, M., Huang, C., Schweitzer, I. | 2002 | A case of mania induced by hypericum | World J. Biol. Psychiatry | 3 | 58–59 |
| Felter, H.W., Lloyd, J.U. | 2008 (b) (1898) | King's American Dispensatory | - | - | - |
| Fernandez-San-Martin, M.I., Masa-Font, R., Palacios-Soler, L., Sancho-Gomez, P., Calbo-Caldentey, C., Flores-Mateo, G. | 2010 | Effectiveness of Valerian on insomnia: a meta-analysis of randomized placebo-controlled trials | Sleep Med. | 11 | 505–511 |
| Fournier, J., DeRubeis, R., Hollon, S., Dimidjian, S., Amsterdam, J., Shelton, R., Fawcett, J. | 2010 | Antidepressant drug effects and depression severity: a patient-level meta-analysis | JAMA | 303 | 47–53 |
| Franklin, M., Hafizi, S., Reed, A., Hockney, R., Murck, H. | 2006 | Effect of sub-chronic treatment with Jarsin (extract of St John's wort, Hypericum perforatum) at two dose levels on evening salivary melatonin and cortisol concentrations in healthy male volunteers | Pharmacopsychiatry | 39 | 13–15 |
| García-García, P., López-Muñoz, F., Rubio, G., Martín-Agueda, B., Alamo, C. | 2008 | Phytotherapy and psychiatry: bibliometric study of the scientific literature from the last 20 years | Phytomedicine | 15 | 566–576 |
| Grundmann, O., Wang, J., McGregor, G.P., Butterweck, V. | 2008 | Anxiolytic activity of a phytochemically characterized Passiflora incarnata extract is mediated via the GABAergic system | Planta Med. | 74 | 1769–1773 |
| Grundmann, O., Wahling, C., Staiger, C., Butterweck, V. | 2009 | Anxiolytic effects of a passion flower (Passiflora incarnata L.) extract in the elevated plus maze in mice | Pharmazie | 64 | 63–64 |
| Hanus, M., Lafon, J., Mathieu, M. | 2004 | Double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a fixed combination containing two plant extracts (Crataegus oxyacantha and Eschscholtzia californica) and magnesium in mild-to-moderate anxiety disorders | Curr. Med. Res. Opin. | 20 | 63–71 |
| Heinrich, M., Barnes, J., Gibbons, S., Williamson, E. | 2004 | Fundamentals of Pharmacognosy and Phytotherapy | Churchill Livingstone | London | - |
| Hindmarch, I. | 2001 | Expanding the horizons of depression: beyond the monoamine hypothesis | Hum. Psychopharmacol. | 16 | 203–218 |
| Hosseinzadeh, H., Noraei, N.B. | 2009 | Anxiolytic and hypnotic effect of Crocus sativus aqueous extract and its constituents, crocin and safranal, in mice | Phytother. Res. | 23 | 768–774 |
| Houghton, P. | 2009 | Synergy and polyvalence: paradigms to explain the activity of herbal products | In: Mukherjee, P., Houghton, P. (Eds.), Evaluation of Herbal Medicinal Products: Perspectives on Quality, Safety and Efficacy | Pharmaceutical Press | - |
| Hsieh, M.T., Chen, H.C., Hsu, P.H., Shibuya, T. | 1986a | Effects of Suanzaorentang on behavior changes and central monoamines | Proc Natl Sci Counc Repub China B | 10 | 43–48 |
| Hsieh, M.T., Chen, H.C., Kao, H.C., Shibuya, T. | 1986b | Suanzaorentang, and anxiolytic Chinese medicine, affects the central adrenergic and serotonergic systems in rats | Proc Natl Sci Counc Repub China B | 10 | 263–268 |
| Hypericum Depression Trial Study Group | 2002 | Effect of Hypericum perforatum (St John's wort) in major depressive disorder: a randomized controlled trial | Jama | 287 | 1807–1814 |
| Izzo, A.A. | 2004 | Drug interactions with St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum): a review of the clinical evidence | Int. J. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. | 42 | 139–148 |
| Joo, S.S., Won, T.J., Lee, D.I. | 2005 | Reciprocal activity of ginsenosides in the production of proinflammatory repertoire, and their potential roles in neuroprotection in vivo | Planta Med. | 71 | 476–481 |
| Jordan, S.A., Cunningham, D.G., Marles, R.J. | 2010 | Assessment of herbal medicinal products: challenges, and opportunities to increase the knowledge base for safety assessment | Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. | 243 | 198–216 |
| Jung, J.W., Cho, J.H., Ahn, N.Y., Oh, H.R., Kim, S.Y., Jang, C.G., Ryu, J.H. | 2005 | Effect of chronic Albizzia julibrissin treatment on 5-hydroxytryptamine1A receptors in rat brain | Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. | 81 | 205–210 |
| Jussofie, A., Schmiz, A., Hiemke, C. | 1994 | Kavapyrone enriched extract from Piper methysticum as modulator of the GABA binding site in different regions of rat brain | Psychopharmacology Berl | 116 | 469–474 | J. Sarris et al.

| Study | Findings |
|-------|----------|
| Kasper et al., 2008 | Continuation and long-term maintenance treatment with Hypericum extract WS 5570 after recovery from an acute episode of moderate depression—a double-blind, randomized, placebo controlled long-term trial. |
| Kasper et al., 2010a | Efficacy and tolerability of Hypericum extract for the treatment of mild to moderate depression. |
| Kasper et al., 2010b | Better tolerability of St. John's wort extract WS 5570 compared to treatment with SSRIs: a reanalysis of data from controlled clinical trials in acute major depression. |
| Kennedy et al., 2002 | Modulation of mood and cognitive performance following acute administration of Melissa officinalis (lemon balm). |
| Kennedy et al., 2004 | Attenuation of laboratory-induced stress in humans after acute administration of Melissa officinalis (Lemon Balm). |
| Kessler et al., 2001 | The use of complementary and alternative therapies to treat anxiety and depression in the United States. |
| Kessler et al., 2005 | Prevalence, severity, and comorbidity of 12-month DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. |
| Kim et al., 2003 | Effects of ginseng saponin administered intraperitoneally on the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis in mice. |
| Kim et al., 2004 | Anxiolytic-like effects of extracts from Albizzia julibrissin bark in the elevated plus-maze in rats. |
| Kim et al., 2007 | Antidepressant-like effects of Albizzia julibrissin in mice: involvement of the 5-HT1A receptor system. |
| Kleber et al., 1995 | Modulation of key reactions of the catecholamine metabolism by extracts from Eschscholtzia californica and Corydalis cava. |
| Kobak et al., 2005a | St John's wort versus placebo in obsessive–compulsive disorder: results from a double-blind study. |
| Kobak et al., 2005b | St. John's wort versus placebo in social phobia: results from a placebo-controlled pilot study. |
| Koch, 2005 | Inhibition of platelet activating factor (PAF)-induced aggregation of human thrombocytes by ginkgolides: considerations on possible bleeding complications after oral intake of Ginkgo biloba extracts. |
| Krishnakumar et al., 2009 | Upregulation of 5-HT2C receptors in hippocampus of pilocarpine-induced epileptic rats: antagonism by Bacopa monnieri. |
| Kumar, 2006 | Potential medicinal plants for CNS disorders: an overview. |
| Lakhan & Vieira, 2010 | Nutritional and herbal supplements for anxiety and anxiety-related disorders: systematic review. |
| Lechtenberg et al., 2008 | Quality and functionality of saffron: quality control, species assortment and affinity of extract and isolated saffron compounds to NMDA and sigma1 (sigma-1) receptors. |
| Limpeanchob et al., 2008 | Neuroprotective effect of Bacopa monnieri on beta-amyloid-induced cell death in primary cortical culture. |
| Linde et al., 2008 | St John's wort for major depression. |
| Lopez et al., 2009 | Neuroprotective and neurological properties of Melissa officinalis. |
| Madabushi et al., 2006 | Hyperforin in St. John's wort drug interactions. |
| Magura et al., 1997 | Kava extract ingredients, (+)-methysticin and (+/−)-kavain inhibit voltage-operated Na(+)-channels in rat CA1 hippocampal neurons. |
| Mattioli et al., 2009 | Effects of Rhodiola rosea L. extract on behavioural and physiological alterations induced by chronic mild stress in female rats. |
| Mehta et al., 1991 | Pharmacological effects of Withania somnifera root extract on GABAA receptor complex. |
| Mills & Bone, 2000 | Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy. |
| Miyasaka et al., 2007 | Passiflora for anxiety disorder. |
| Morishita et al., 1987 | Pharmacological studies of water extract of the Zizyphus seed and the Zizyphus seed containing drug. |
| Moshiri et al., 2006 | Crocus sativus L. (petal) in the treatment of mild-to-moderate depression: a double-blind, randomized and placebo-controlled trial. |
| Movafegh et al., 2008 | Preoperative oral Passiflora incarnata reduces anxiety in ambulatory surgery patients: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study. |
| Muller & Klement, 2006 | A combination of valerian and lemon balm is effective in the treatment of restlessness and dyssomnia in children. |
| Muller et al., 1994 | Effects of Hypericum extract on the expression of serotonin receptors. |
| Muller et al., 2003 | Treating depression comorbid with anxiety—results of an open, practice-oriented study with St John's wort WS 5572 and valerian extract in high doses. |
| Murphy et al., 2009 | Valeriana officinalis root extracts have potent anxiolytic effects in laboratory rats. |
| Neuhaus et al., 2008 | Transport of a GABAA receptor modulator and its derivatives from Valeriana officinalis L. s. l. across an in vitro cell culture model of the blood-brain barrier. |
| Ngan & Conduit, 2011 | A double-blind, placebo-controlled investigation of the effects of Passiflora incarnata (passionflower) herbal tea on subjective sleep quality. |
| Nierenberg, 2001 | Current perspectives on the diagnosis and treatment of major depressive disorder. |
| Noorbala et al., 2005 | Hydro-alcoholic extract of Crocus sativus L. versus fluoxetine in the treatment of mild to moderate depression: a double-blind, randomized pilot trial. | Herbal Psychopharmacology

| Author(s) | Year | Title | Journal | Volume | Pages |
|-----------|------|-------|---------|--------|-------|
| Nutt, D.J., Ballenger, J.C., Sheehan, D., Wittchen, H.U. | 2002 | Generalized anxiety disorder: comorbidity, comparative biology and treatment | Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol. | 5 | 315–325 |
| Ortiz, J.G., Nieves-Natal, J., Chavez, P. | 1999 | Effects of Valeriana officinalis extracts on [3H]flunitrazepam binding, synaptosomal [3H]GABA uptake, and hippocampal [3H]GABA release | Neurochem. Res. | 24 | 1373–1378 |
| Panossian, A., Wikman, G. | 2009 | Evidence-based efficacy of adaptogens in fatigue, and molecular mechanisms related to their stress-protective activity | Curr. Clin. Pharmacol. | 4 | 198–219 |
| Panossian, A., Hambartsumyan, M., Hovanissian, A., Gabrielyan, E., Wikman, G. | 2007 | The Adaptogens Rhodiola and Schizandra Modify the Response to Immobilization Stress in Rabbits by Suppressing the Increase of Phosphorylated Stress-activated Protein Kinase, Nitric Oxide and Cortisol | Drug Targets Insights | 1 | 39–54 |
| Panossian, A., Nikoyan, N., Ohanyan, N., Hovhannisyan, A., Abrahamyan, H., Gabrielyan, E., Wikman, G. | 2008 | Comparative study of Rhodiola preparations on behavioral despair of rats | Phytomedicine | 15 (1) | 84–91 |
| Papakostas, G. | 2008 | Tolerability of modern antidepressants | J. Clin. Psychiatry | 69 | 8–13 Suppl |
| Park, J.H., Cha, H.Y., Seo, J.J., Hong, J.T., Han, K., Oh, K.W. | 2005 | Anxiolytic-like effects of ginseng in the elevated plus-maze model: comparison of red ginseng and sun ginseng | Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry | 29 | 895–900 |
| Patočka, J., Jakl, J. | 2010 | Biomedically relevant chemical constituents of Valeriana officinalis | J Appl Biomed | 8 | |
| Patten, S.B., Beck, C. | 2004 | Major depression and mental health care utilization in Canada: 1994 to 2000 | Can J Psychiatry | 49 | 303–309 |
| Pengelly, A. | 1997 | The Constituents of Medicinal Plants | Fast Books | | Glebe, NSW |
| Pennington, K., Focking, M., McManus, C.A., Pariante, C.M., Dunn, M.J., Cotter, D.R. | 2009 | A proteomic investigation of similarities between conventional and herbal antidepressant treatments | J Psychopharmacol | 23 | 520–530 |
| Perfumi, M., Mattioli, L. | 2007 | Adaptogenic and central nervous system effects of single doses of 3% rosavin and 1% salidroside Rhodiola rosea L. extract in mice | Phytother. Res. | 21 | 37–43 |
| Perry, N., Perry, E. | 2006 | Aromatherapy in the management of psychiatric disorders | CNS Drugs | 20 | 257–280 |
| Pittler, M.H., Ernst, E. | 2003 | Kava extract for treating anxiety | Cochrane Database Syst Rev | CD003383 | |
| Plotsky, P.M., Owens, M.J., Nemeroff, C.B. | 1998 | Psychoneuroendocrinology of depression. Hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis | Psychiatr. Clin. North Am. | 21 | 293–307 |
| Rabbani, M., Sajjadi, S.E., Vaseghi, G., Jafarian, A. | 2004 | Anxiolytic effects of Echium amoenum on the elevated plus-maze model of anxiety in mice | Fitoterapia | 75 | 457–464 |
| Rahimi, R., Nikfar, S., Abdollahi, M. | 2009 | Efficacy and tolerability of Hypericum perforatum in major depressive disorder in comparison with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors: a meta-analysis | Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry | 33 | 118–127 |
| Raison, C.L., Capuron, L., Miller, A.H. | 2006 | Cytokines sing the blues: inflammation and the pathogenesis of depression | Trends Immunol. | 27 | 24–31 |
| Rege, N.N., Thatte, U.M., Dahanukar, S.A. | 1999 | Adaptogenic properties of six rasayana herbs used in Ayurvedic medicine | Phytother. Res. | 13 | 275–291 |
| Ressler, K.J., Nemeroff, C.B. | 2000 | Role of serotonergic and noradrenergic systems in the pathophysiology of depression and anxiety disorders | Depress. Anxiety | 12 (Suppl 1) | 2–19 |
| Rolland, A., Fleurentin, J., Lanhers, M.C., Younos, C., Misslin, R., Mortier, F., Pelt, J.M. | 1991 | Behavioural effects of the American traditional plant Eschscholzia californica: sedative and anxiolytic properties | Planta Med. | 57 | 212–216 |
| Rolland, A., Fleurentin, J., Lanhers, M.C., Misslin, R., Mortier, F. | 2001 | Neurophysiological effects of an extract of Eschscholzia californica Cham. (Papaveraceae) | Phytother. Res. | 15 | 377–381 |
| Roth, T., Roehrs, T. | 2003 | Insomnia: epidemiology, characteristics, and consequences | Clinical Cornerstone Chronic Insomnia | 5 | 5–15 |
| Roth, T., Roehrs, T., Pies, R. | 2007 | Insomnia: pathophysiology and implications for treatment | Sleep Med. Rev. | 11 | 71–79 |
| Sairam, K., Dorababu, M., Goel, R.K., Bhattacharya, S.K. | 2002 | Antidepressant activity of standardized extract of Bacopa monniera in experimental models of depression in rats | Phytomedicine | 9 | 207–211 |
| Salgueiro, J.B., Ardenghi, P., Dias, M., Ferreira, M.B., Izquierdo, I., Medina, J.H. | 1997 | Anxiolytic natural and synthetic flavonoid ligands of the central benzodiazepine receptor have no effect on memory tasks in rats | Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. | 58 | 887–891 |
| Sarris, J. | 2007 | Herbal medicines in the treatment of psychiatric disorders: a systematic review | Phytother. Res. | 21 | 703–716 |
| Sarris, J., Byrne, G. | 2011 | A systematic review of insomnia and complementary medicine | Sleep Med. Rev. | 15 (2) | 99–106 |
| Sarris, J., Kavanagh, D.J. | 2009 | Kava and St John's wort: current evidence for use in mood and anxiety disorders | J Altern Complement Med | 15 | 827–836 |
| Sarris, J., Kavanagh, D., Byrne, G., Bone, K., Adams, J., Deed, G. | 2009a | The Kava Anxiety Depression Spectrum Study (KADSS): a randomized, placebo-controlled, cross-over trial using an aqueous extract of Piper methysticum | Psychopharmacology Berl | 205 | 399–407 |
| Sarris, J., Kavanagh, D.J., Deed, G., Bone, K.M. | 2009b | St. John's wort and Kava in treating major depressive disorder with comorbid anxiety: a randomised double-blind placebo-controlled pilot trial | Hum. Psychopharmacol. | 24 | 41–48 |
| Sarris, J., Kavanagh, D., Byrne, G. | 2010a | Adjuvant use of nutritional and herbal medicines with antidepressants, mood stabilizers and benzodiazepines | J. Psychiatr. Res. | 44 | 32–41 |
| Sarris, J., La Porte, E., Schweitzer, I. | 2010c | Kava: A comprehensive review of efficacy, safety, and psychopharmacology | Aust N Z J Psychiatry | in press | |
| Sarris, J., Teschke, R., Stough, C., Scholey, A., Schweitzer, I. | 2010c | Re-introduction of kava (Piper methysticum) to the EU: is there a way forward? | Planta Med. | 77 (2) | 107–110 |
| Sateia, M.J., Nowell, P.D. | 2004 | Insomnia | Lancet | 364 | 1959–1973 |
| Savelev, S., Okello, E., Perry, N.S., Wilkins, R.M., Perry, E.K. | 2003 | Synergistic and antagonistic interactions of anticholinesterase terpenoids in Salvia lavandulaefolia essential oil | Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. | 75 | 661–668 |
| Sayyah, M., Sayyah, M., Kamalinejad, M. | 2006 | A preliminary randomized double blind clinical trial on the efficacy of aqueous extract of Echium amoenum in the treatment of mild to moderate major depression | Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry | 30 | 166–169 |
| Sayyah, M., Boostani, H., Pakseresht, S., Malaieri, A. | 2009a | Efficacy of aqueous extract of Echium amoenum in treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder | Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry | 33 | 1513–1516 |
| Sayyah, M., Boostani, H., Pakseresht, S., Malaieri, A. | 2009b | Efficacy of aqueous extract of Echium amoenum in treatment of obsessive–compulsive disorder | Progress Neuro Psychopharmacology Biological Psychiatry | 33 | 1513–1516 |
| Schafer, H.L., Schafer, H., Schneider, W., Elstner, E.F. | 1995 | Sedative action of extract combinations of Eschscholtzia californica and Corydalis cava | Arzneimittelforschung | 45 | 124–126 |
| Schmidt, M., Betti, G., Hensel, A. | 2007 | Saffron in phytotherapy: pharmacology and clinical uses | Wien. Med. Wochenschr. | 157 | 315–319 |
| Scholey, A., Kennedy, D., Wesnes, K. | 2005 | The psychopharmacology of herbal extracts: issues and challenges | Psychopharmacology Berl | 179 | 705–707 author reply 708–711 |
| Scholey, A.B., Tildesley, N.T., Ballard, C.G., Wesnes, K.A., Tasker, A., Perry, E.K., Kennedy, D.O. | 2008 | An extract of Salvia (sage) with anticholinesterase properties improves memory and attention in healthy older volunteers | Psychopharmacology Berl | 198 | 127–139 | 20

Schweitzer, I., Maguire, K., Ng, C., 2009. Sexual side-effects of contemporary antidepressants: review. Aust. N. Z. J. Psychiatry 43, 795–808
Sena, L.M., Zucolotto, S.M., Reginatto, F.H., Schenkel, E.P., De Lima, T.C., 2009. Neuropharmacological activity of the pericarp of Passiflora edulis flavicarpa degener: putative involvement of C-glycosylflavonoids. Exp Biol Med Maywood 234, 967–975
Shaw, D., Annett, J.M., Doherty, B., Leslie, J.C., 2007. Anxiolytic effects of lavender oil inhalation on open-field behaviour in rats. Phytomedicine 14, 613–620
Sichardt, K., Vissiennon, Z., Koetter, U., Brattstrom, A., Nieber, K., 2007. Modulation of postsynaptic potentials in rat cortical neurons by valerian extracts macerated with different alcohols: involvement of adenosine A(1)- and GABA(A)-receptors. Phytother. Res. 21, 932–937
Singer, A., Wonnemann, M., Muller, W.E., 1999. Hyperforin, a major antidepressant constituent of St. John's Wort, inhibits serotonin uptake by elevating free intracellular Na+ 1. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 290, 1363–1368
Spinella, M., 2001. The Psychopharmacology of Herbal Medicine: Plant Drugs That Alter Mind, Brain and Behavior (Paperback). MIT Press, Cambridge
Stough, C., Lloyd, J., Clarke, J., Downey, L.A., Hutchison, C.W., Rodgers, T., Nathan, P.J., 2001. The chronic effects of an extract of Bacopa monniera (Brahmi) on cognitive function in healthy human subjects. Psychopharmacology Berl 156, 481–484
Teschke, R., 2010. Kava hepatotoxicity — a clinical review. Ann. Hepatol. 9 (3), 251–265
Teschke, R., Sarris, J., Glass, X., Schulzes, J. Kava, the anxiolytic herb: back to basics to prevent liver injury? Br J Clin Pharm in press
Toda, M., Morimoto, K., 2008. Effect of lavender aroma on salivary endocrinological stress markers. Arch. Oral Biol. 53, 964–968
Tranulis, C., Skalli, L., Lalonde, P., Nicole, L., Stip, E., 2008. Benefits and risks of antipsychotic polypharmacy: an evidence-based review of the literature. Drug Saf. 31, 7–20
Trauner, G., Khom, S., Baburin, I., Benedek, B., Hering, S., Kopp, B., 2008. Modulation of GABAA receptors by valerian extracts is related to the content of valerenic acid. Planta Med. 74, 19–24
Tripathi, Y.B., Chaurasia, S., Tripathi, E., Upadhyay, A., Dubey, G.P., 1996. Bacopa monniera Linn. as an antioxidant: mechanism of action. Indian J. Exp. Biol. 34, 523–526
Tyrer, P., Baldwin, D., 2006. Generalised anxiety disorder. Lancet 368, 2156–2166
Uebelhack, R., Franke, L., Schewe, H.J., 1998. Inhibition of platelet MAO-B by kava pyrone-enriched extract from Piper methysticum Forster (kava-kava). Pharmacopsychiatry 31, 187–192
Ulrich-Merzenich, G., Zeitler, H., Jobst, D., Panek, D., Vetter, H., Wagner, H., 2007. Application of the “-Omic-” technologies in phytomedicine. Phytomedicine 14, 70–82
van Diermen, D., Marston, A., Bravo, J., Reist, M., Carrupt, P.A., Hostettmann, K., 2009. Monoamine oxidase inhibition by Rhodiola rosea L. roots. J. Ethnopharmacol. 122, 397–401
Viola, H., Wasowski, C., Levi de Stein, M., Wolfman, C., Silveira, R., Dajas, F., Medina, J.H., Paladini, A.C., 1995. Apigenin, a component of Matricaria recutita flowers, is a central benzodiazepine receptors-ligand with anxiolytic effects. Planta Med. 61, 213–216
Wermuth, C.G., 2004. Multitargeted drugs: the end of the “one-target-one-disease” philosophy? Drug Discov. Today 9, 826–827
Werneke, U., Horn, O., Taylor, D., 2004. How effective is St John's wort? The evidence revisited. J. Clin. Psychiatry 65, 611–617
Whitten, D., Myers, D., Hawrelak, J., Wohlmuth, H., 2006. The effect of St John's wort extracts on CYP3A: a systematic review of prospective clinical trials. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 62, 512–526
WHO, 2006. Mental and Neurological Disorders ‘Depression’
Wijeweera, P., Arnason, J.T., Koszycki, D., Merali, Z., 2006. Evaluation of anxiolytic properties of Gotukola — (Centella asiatica) extracts and asiaticoside in rat behavioral models. Phytomedicine 13 (9–10), 668–676
Williamson, E.M., 2001. Synergy and other interactions in phytomedicines. Phytomedicine 8, 401–409
Witte, S., Loew, D., Gaus, W., 2005. Meta-analysis of the efficacy of the acetonic kava-kava extract WS1490 in patients with non-psychotic anxiety disorders. Phytother. Res. 19, 183–188
Woelk, H., Arnoldt, K.H., Kieser, M., Hoerr, R., 2006. Ginkgo biloba special extract EGb 761((R)) in generalized anxiety disorder and adjustment disorder with anxious mood: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J. Psychiatr. Res. 41 (6), 472–480
Woelk, H., Arnoldt, K., Kieser, M., Hoerr, R., 2007. Ginkgo biloba special extract EGb 761 in generalized anxiety disorder and adjustment disorder with anxious mood: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J. Psychiatr. Res. 41, 472–480
Wolfson, P., Hoffmann, D., 2003. An investigation into the efficacy of Scutellaria lateriflora in healthy volunteers. Alt. Ther. Health Med. NLM MEDLINE 9, 74
Wong, M.L., O'Kirwan, F., Hannestad, J.P., Irizarry, K.J., Elashoff, D., Licinio, J., 2004. St John's wort and imipramine-induced gene expression profiles identify cellular functions relevant to antidepressant action and novel pharmacogenetic candidates for the phenotype of antidepressant treatment response. Mol. Psychiatry 9, 237–251
Wurglics, M., Schubert-Zsilavecz, M., 2006. Hypericum perforatum: a ‘modern’ herbal antidepressant: pharmacokinetics of active ingredients. Clin. Pharmacokinet. 45, 449–468
Yoshitake, T., Iizuka, R., Yoshitake, S., Weikop, P., Muller, W., Ogren, S., Kehr, J., 2004. Hypericum perforatum L (St John's wort) preferentially increases extracellular dopamine levels in the rat prefrontal cortex. Br. J. Pharmacol. 142, 414–418
Zanoli, P., Avallone, R., Baraldi, M., 2000. Behavioral characterisation of the flavonoids apigenin and chrysin. Fitoterapia 71 (Suppl 1), S117–S123

Please cite this article as: Sarris, J., et al., Herbal medicine for depression, anxiety and insomnia: A review of psychopharmacology and clinical evidence, Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. (2011), doi:10.1016/j.euroneuro.2011.04.002

View publication stats 