COMMENTARY

Duration Isn’t Everything. Healthy Sleep in Children and Teens: Duration, Individual Need and Timing

A recent publication in the Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine provided general guidelines for child and adolescent sleep duration by age group. This was followed by a publication in this issue the Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine that provides an in-depth description of the methods used to arrive at the sleep duration recommendations. These publications are long awaited, and the consensus statement carries particular weight due to the endorsements of American Academy of Pediatrics, the Sleep Research Society, and the American Academy of Sleep Medicine. The authors performed an exhaustive evaluation of peer reviewed publications selected based on the Oxford Criteria, and then used a Rand Appropriateness modeling approach to arrive at consensus on best estimates of healthy sleep duration for children ages 4 months to 17 years. Developing consensus about this important health behavior certainly demands great care and consideration because deficient sleep duration is a contributor to decrements in physical health, mental health, and development.

Publication of these recent AASM recommendations follows comparable recommendations from the National Sleep Foundation, which differ in part by including a category “May be Appropriate” that extends the range of sleep durations for each age grouping by ± 2 hours. We raise a few key challenges to the consensus recommendations and have equally significant concerns about the NSF recommendations which used similar methodology. Most important, the ranges of sleep times and ages are too broad for the recommendations to be understood and applied by providers and caregivers, and policy makers. Additionally, neither set of recommendations addresses several sleep variables that are necessary to provide context for sleep duration recommendations. Such additional variables include the timing of sleep episodes during the night and day, individual variability in daily sleep need, and signs of insufficient sleep. While only alluded to in the methodology paper, introducing such concepts in the consensus recommendations is necessary, as these variables are as important as sleep duration due to their demonstrated direct impact on child health.

To use the nutrition analogy again, it was deemed important for the federal government to release initial nutrition recommendations (e.g., the food pyramid), and to make revisions. to reflect advances in health and nutrition science. The nutri- scientific literature and consideration of how the public would interpret the groups would have been optimal. The choice to use specific and overlapping categories of health outcomes is quite reasonable and emphasizes the importance of sufficient sleep and the need for future research. It is important to note that virtually all of the outcomes are quite distal to episodic or chronic deficient sleep duration. It is not clear why the authors did not include outcome variables that are sensitive to the daily effects of insufficient sleep such as daytime tiredness, increased daytime sleep propensity, impaired attention, and mood dysregulation. These variables are important as they provide immediate feedback on day to day deficiencies in sleep that can guide caregivers and providers understanding individual’s children’s sleep need.

In summary, sleep health has been identified as a national health priority and there must be rational and implementable recommendations as well as a commitment to a research plan that addresses large gaps in the scientific literature on optimal sleep. Until science catches up with the public health recommendations, it is safer to recommend the higher rather than the lower estimates of sleep. Such sleep health recommendations should also reflect some of the complexities of the sleep and circadian system, while at the same time they must be communicated in a way that the public can understand and implement them. A statement about sleep duration, even with narrow implementable parameters, cannot capture the complexity of the sleep wake system between 4 months and 17 years. To improve the public health message we recommend a few modifications and additions that will clarify the recommendations and support implementation. The following modifications and clarifying statements are derived from standard clinical practice and scientifically established principles:

1. Provide recommended sleep ranges for each year or at most 3 year age groupings with a narrow range of sleep durations that are optimal for every age grouping and consistent with the child development literature. Provide indicators for determining sleep need and identifying the signs of insufficient sleep (e.g., difficulty waking in the morning; unplanned or long daytime naps; irritability, depressed mood, low frustration tolerance, difficulties in school, and inattention).
2. Provide general guidelines on the timing of day and night sleep periods (e.g., a. day-to-day sleep duration varying more than 1.5 hours on weekdays and more than 2 hours on weekends is a sign of insufficient sleep and possibly a circadian rhythm misalignment or disorder; and for children older than 6 years, afternoon naps longer than 20 minutes may indicate insufficient nocturnal sleep, can delay bedtime, and can contribute to circadian rhythm dysregulation).

Furthermore, the rationale for the age groupings are based on those selected by other groups; yet it is noteworthy that the NIH recommendations use general developmental categories without ages and narrower sleep duration recommendations (i.e., preschool age: 11–12 hours; school age: at least 10 hours; teens: 9–10 hours). While very general, the NIH recommendation addresses important changes in sleep and circadian regulation and environmental demands that occur at the transition to elementary school and for older children at the onset of puberty. Clearer justification of age groupings based on the selected publications is necessary. R E FE R E N CES

| No. | Reference |
|-----|-----------|
| 1   | Paruthi S, Brooks LJ, D’Ambrosio C, et al. Recommended amount of sleep for pediatric populations: a statement of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine. J Clin Sleep Med 2016;12:785–6. |
| 2   | Paruthi S, Brooks LJ, D’Ambrosio C, et al. Consensus statement of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine on the recommended amount of sleep for healthy children: methodology and discussion. J Clin Sleep Med 2016;12:1549–61. |
| 3   | Herman JH, Hirshkowitz M. Sleep medicine and psychiatric disorders in children. Sleep Med Clin 2015;10(2):xiii-xiv. |
| 4   | Moore M, Kirchner HL, Drotar D, Johnson N, Rosen C, Redline S. Correlates of adolescent sleep time and variability in sleep time: the role of individual and health related characteristics. Sleep Med 2011;12:239–45. |
| 5   | Watson NF. Sleep duration: a consensus conference. J Clin Sleep Med 2015;11:7–8. |
| 6   | Watson NF. Sleep duration: a consensus conference. Sleep 2015;38:5. |
| 7   | Matricciani L, Blunden S, Rigney G, Williams MT, Olds TS. Children’s sleep needs: is there sufficient evidence to recommend optimal sleep for children? Sleep 2013;36:527–34. |
| 8   | Gambera PJ, Schneeman BO, Davis PA. Use of the Food Guide Pyramid and US Dietary Guidelines to improve dietary intake and reduce cardiovascular risk in active-duty Air Force members. J Am Diet Assoc 1995;95:1268–73. |
| 9   | Trachtenberg FL, Haas EA, Kinney HC, Stanley C, Krous HF. Risk factor changes for sudden infant death syndrome after initiation of Back-to-Sleep campaign. Pediatrics 2012;129:630–8. |
| 10  | Turk AE, McCarthy JG, Thorne CH, Wisoff JH. The “back to sleep campaign” and deformational plagiocephaly: is there cause for concern? J Craniofac Surg 1996;7:12–8. |
| 11  | Moon RY. SIDS and other sleep-related infant deaths: expansion of recommendations for a safe infant sleeping environment. Pediatrics 2011;128:1030–9. |

D I SCLO S U R E STAT E M E NT

This was not an industry supported study. The authors have indicated no financial conflicts of interest. 