## Further Evidence for the JuSt Program as Treatment for Insomnia in Adolescents: Results from a 1-Year Follow-Up Study

### Study Objectives
Insomnia in adolescence adversely affects young people’s current and future functioning, as well as their mental and physical health. Thus, effective and economic treatment is invaluable. The present study evaluated a 6-session multimodal group therapy, JuSt, for adolescents suffering from insomnia including cognitive-behavioral elements and clinical hypnosis.

### Methods
Participants (n = 19, 68.4% female) were aged 11–16 years and suffered from insomnia. Sleep onset latency (SOL), time spent awake time after sleep onset (WASO), and sleep efficiency (SE) were measured with sleep logs before and after treatment, and at 3-, 6-, and 12-month follow-up.

### Results
Compared to baseline, SOL and WASO significantly decreased, while there was a significant increase in SE and the feeling of being rested after the JuSt treatment. At 12-month follow-up, all parameters were still significantly different from their baseline level. The long-term effect sizes were at least as large as the short-term effects, indicating a stable improvement.

### Conclusions
These results suggest that the JuSt program represents a potent intervention to sustainably reduce insomniac complaints in adolescents. Given the unselected nature of our sample, a broad indication can be assumed. To further evaluate the program’s efficacy, randomized controlled trials should be conducted.

### Keywords
insomnia, adolescence, sleep disorder, cognitive behavioral therapy

## INTRODUCTION
Adolescence is characterized by developmental processes that cause physical, mental, and social changes in young people’s lives. Also their sleep is subject to developmental processes, which cause a decrease in sleep duration as well as in sleep depth and a delay in the sleep-wake-rhythm. Psychosocial changes, e.g., peer activities in the evening or at night and less parental influence on sleep timing, also contribute to alterations in adolescents’ sleep behavior. Taken together, all these aspects cause sleep to become shorter, lighter, and later during the course of puberty. While this process itself is not harmful, it may, however, facilitate the manifestation of sleep problems, especially insomnia.

According to the third edition of the International Classification of Sleep Disorders (ICSD), insomnia is characterized by difficulties initiating or maintaining sleep, waking up too early, or complaints about poor sleep quality. These problems occur despite adequate opportunity and circumstances for sleep and are accompanied by daytime impairments, such as daytime sleepiness, mood disturbance, or attention deficits. In a study by Johnson and colleagues, lifetime prevalence of insomnia in adolescents aged 13 to 16 years was 10.7%. Other studies on adolescents report point prevalence rates between 4 and 6.6%. Insomnia symptoms in adolescence often become chronic and adversely affect various outcome measures, including school performance, social functioning, and mental health, especially anxiety disorders and depression, but also aggressive behavior and suicidality. Since sleep problems in adolescents put both an immediate and a long-ranging threat on young people’s development, effective interventions that target sleep disorders at an early stage are necessary.

A promising approach to treat adolescents with insomnia has been developed by Schlarb, who adapted therapeutic strategies that have proven effective in adult sleep therapy to a multimodal treatment, “JuSt,” addressing adolescents with insomnia between 11 and 17 years of age. The JuSt treatment comprises 6 weekly sessions for groups of 4–8 adolescent patients. Five sessions take place with the adolescents, while one session is conducted for their parents. The therapeutic components of the JuSt are psychoeducation about sleep and its disorders, behavioral strategies such as sleep hygiene and stimulus control, cognitive therapy addressing rumination and dysfunctional cognitions, guided imagery to foster relaxation, and clinical hypnosis. By combining multiple psychotherapeutic approaches, the JuSt program aims to effectively address insomnia in adolescents. Figure 1—Study procedure and sample sizes for each time of measurement.

| Measurement Time        | Sample Size | Missings                                      |
|-------------------------|-------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| Additional pre measurement (t0) | n = 23      |                                               |
| Pre measurement (t1)    | n = 23      |                                               |
| Post measurement (t2)   | n = 21      | Documents lost by the post office             |
| 3-month follow-up (t3)  | n = 21      | Hospital treatment of the mother              |
| 6-month follow-up (t4)  | n = 21      | The family had moved houses                   |
| 12-month follow-up (t5) | n = 21      | The family had moved houses (see t4)         |
|                         |             | Family-related reasons                        |

Note that the missings indicated for each time of measurement result in a listwise valid sample size of n = 19 participants.

We implemented a pre-post study design with participants undergoing 5 occasions of measurement. During the first diagnostic appointment (t1), sleep-related diagnoses were examined using the ICSD, and adolescents’ medical history were assessed to identify comorbid mental disorders. One week after treatment, adolescents completed the post-measurement (t2). Follow-up measurements were conducted 3 (t3), 6 (t4), and 12 months (t5) after treatment. At each time of measurement, participants completed several diagnostic instruments, including sleep logs, from which the outcome variables of the present study were derived. A total of n = 23 adolescents participated; 4 had to be excluded, because they did not provide sleep log data at all times of measurement due to reasons indicated in Figure 1. None of them had a comorbid mental disorder. Thus, the following analyses are based on n = 19 adolescents aged 11–16 years (mean = 13.55, standard deviation ± 1.75, n = 13 [68.4%] female), who completed the treatment and provided sleep logs at all times of measurement. To evaluate possible effects of waiting, n = 8 participants had been assessed twice before treatment (t0) at an interval of 3 months on average.

At each time of measurement, participants completed sleep logs for a 2-week period. The second week’s data were analyzed to allow participants a 1-week adaptation phase to get used to handling the sleep logs. Only in exceptional cases, such as illness or school holidays during the second week, we analyzed the first week’s data. We used the sleep logs to calculate, in minutes per day, mean SOL and mean time spent awake during the night (wake after sleep onset). The sleep logs also asked participants to indicate how rested they felt after awaking, using a visual analogue scale from 1 to 6, with lower scores reflecting feeling more rested (FR). We used SE as an additional outcome variable (SE = total sleep time / total time in bed × 100).

## Data Analysis
All analyses were conducted with IBM SPSS Statistics 19. Due to the relatively small sample size, we applied nonparametric tests, i.e., the Friedman test for detecting differences across the multiple times of measurement, and the Wilcoxon test for comparing two repeated measurements. In case of a significant Friedman test, we conducted 2 post hoc tests to test our hypotheses about short- and long-term effects of the JuSt treatment. Short-term effects were analyzed by comparing the baseline (t1) to post measurement (t2). Regarding the long-term effects, we compared t1 to 12-month follow-up (t5). According to our hypotheses, we expected significant differences in both comparisons. Since we had directional hypotheses, one-tailed p values are reported. The level of statistical significance was set at p ≤ 0.05. For significant differences between 2 times of measurement, effect sizes (dCohen) were calculated and interpreted in sensu Cohen.

Symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder, and one had a history of posttraumatic stress disorder. Of these participants, 3 were taking psychotropic medication (methylphenidate), which was maintained during the study procedure. Means and standard deviations of the study variables are shown in Table 2.

## Sleep Onset Latency (SOL)
Adolescents’ sleep log data showed a significant reduction in SOL during the 12-month study period (χ2(4) = 24.05, p < 0.001). Post hoc comparisons revealed a significant reduction from before (t1) to after treatment (t2, Z = −1.73, p = 0.042) with a small effect of dCohen = −0.30. Comparing t1 to t5 also yielded a significant result (Z = −3.76, p < 0.001). With dCohen = −1.01, the size of this effect was large.

## Wake after Sleep Onset (WASO)
The Friedman-test showed a significant reduction in WASO during the 12-month study period (χ2(4) = 13.22, p = 0.005). Significant differences emerged in the post hoc comparisons between t1 and both t2 (Z = −2.70, p = 0.004), and t5 (Z = −2.67, p = 0.004), with intermediate effects of dCohen = −0.62 and −0.64, respectively.

## RESULTS
At first, we analyzed the subsample of n = 8 participants who had been assessed twice before the beginning of the JuSt treatment. In this group, neither sleep-related diagnoses nor any of the study’s outcome measures had changed significantly between the 2 pre-assessments (SOL: Z = −0.70, ns; WASO: Z = −0.94, ns; SE: Z = −0.84, ns; RS: Z = −0.93, ns). Thus, data from the immediate assessment before treatment (t1) were considered the baseline for all participants.

## Diagnoses
Prevalence rates of participants’ sleep-related diagnoses according to the ICSD are shown in Table 1. In the total sample, insomnia was the main sleep-related diagnosis. In n = 13 (68.4%) adolescents, one or more secondary sleep-related diagnoses were present. None of the participants was taking sleep medication. Comorbid mental disorders were present in n = 7 (36.8%) participants. Four of them had been previously diagnosed with ADHD, two participants reported.

## Feeling Rested (FR)
The Friedman-test revealed significant improvement in FR during the 12-month study period (χ2(4) = 14.24, p = 0.004). In the post hoc comparisons, significant differences emerged between t1 and both t2 (Z = −2.28, p = 0.012).

### Table 1—Sleep-related main and secondary diagnoses.

| Main Diagnosis                          | Secondary Diagnosis                     |
|-----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Insomnia                                |                                        |
| Psychophysiological insomnia             | 7 (36.8)                               |
| Idiopathic insomnia                     | 2 (10.6)                               |
| Insomnia due to mental disorder         | 3 (15.8)                               |
| Inadequate sleep hygiene                | 4 (21.1)                               |
|                                         | 11 (57.9)                              |
| Behavioral insomnia of childhood        | 3 (15.8)                               |
| Other                                   |                                        |
| Delayed sleep phase disorder            | –                                      |
|                                         | 2 (10.5)                               |
| Nightmares                              | –                                      |
|                                         | 3 (15.8)                               |
| Sleep related bruxism                   | –                                      |
|                                         | 1 (5.3)                                |
| Values presented as n (%).             |                                        |

### Table 2—Means and standard deviations of the study variables.

|                | t1 (pre)          | t2 (post)         | t3 (3 months)     | t4 (6 months)     | t5 (12 months)    |
|----------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
| SOL            | 52.90 ± 35.61     | 39.73 ± 51.64     | 23.17 ± 21.91     | 23.10 ± 15.36     | 23.84 ± 19.42     |
| WASO           | 9.55 ± 20.66      | 0.44 ± 1.01       | 1.20 ± 2.68       | 0.68 ± 1.44       | 0.25 ± 0.55       |
| FR             | 3.36 ± 0.97       | 2.97 ± 0.96       | 2.63 ± 1.05       | 2.80 ± 1.05       | 2.83 ± 0.80       |
| SE             | 83.00 ± 9.10      | 88.26 ± 10.15     | 90.98 ± 5.98      | 90.18 ± 5.97      | 90.24 ± 7.25      |

Values presented as mean ± standard deviation. SOL, sleep onset latency (minutes per day); WASO, wake after sleep onset (minutes per day); FR, feeling rested (lower scores indicate better restauration); SE, sleep efficiency (%). Figure 2
A                   Sleep Onset Latency (SOL)                                     B              Wake After Sleep Onset (WASO)
70                                                                               16
60                                                                               14
] 5040                                                                            ] 1218
8 2030                                                                            3
10
Feeling Rested (FR)                                                             Sleep Efficiency (SE)
100
95
90
85
80
tl            t2          t3
(A) Mean sleep onset latency (SOL) in minutes per day, (B) mean wake after sleep onset (WASO) in minutes per day, (C) feeling rested (FR, lower scores
indicate better restauration), and (D) sleep efficiency (SE) in percent per day, in the course of the 12-month study period. Error bars indicate standard error.
t1: pre, t2: post; t3: 3-month follow-up, t4: 6-month follow-up, t5: 12-month follow-up

and t5 (Z = −2.62, p = 0.005) with small (dCohen = −0.40) and
intermediate (dCohen = −0.60) effects, respectively.

Sleep Efficiency (SE)
During the 12-month study period, SE significantly improved
(χ2(4) = 24.63, p < 0.001, see Figure 2D). From t1 to t2, SE
significantly increased (Z = −2.13, p = 0.017), resulting in an
intermediate effect of dCohen = 0.55). The difference between
t1 and the 12-months follow-up was also significant (Z = −3.10,
p = 0.001), with a large effect of dCohen = 0.88.

D I SCUS S I O N

In the present study, we could demonstrate stable effects of
the JuSt treatment, a 6-session multimodal group treatment
by Schlarb, on several sleep parameters in adolescents
with insomnia between 11 and 17 years of age. Adolescence is
characterized by age-specific developmental tasks, and there-
fore, adapting therapeutic strategies to the target age-group
is mandatory. Previous studies on sleep therapy in toddlers
and primary school aged children suggest that age-specific
approaches lead to promising results. With the current study,
we sought to investigate if this was also true for adolescence.
Therefore, the aim of the present study was to provide further
evidence for the short-term and long-term effects of the JuSt
treatment using a pre-post study design. Compared to base-
line before treatment (t1), the sleep parameters characterizing
insomnia, namely SOL, WASO, and FR had significantly im-
proved at post measurement (t2). Thus, after participating in
the JuSt treatment, adolescents fell asleep faster, spent less
time being wake during the night, and felt more refreshed af-
ter awaking. SE also significantly increased between pre and
post measurement. These improvements were still measure-
able 12 months after the treatment. The effect sizes for the
improvement in WASO were medium in the short- and in the
long-term comparison. Thus, this effect remained stable during
our 12-months study period. Regarding SOL, FR and SE, effect
sizes were small to intermediate for the short-term and interme-
diate to large in the long-term comparison. Not only did these
effects remain stable over time, they even gained in strength af-
ter treatment. As evident from Figure 2, SOL, RS, and SE im-
proved until 3-month follow-up and stabilized on this level for
the rest of the follow-up history. A possible explanation might be that, given the relative shortness of the intervention, some therapeutic strategies continued to have a sleep-improving effect even after the six sessions were completed.

Previous findings about the benefits of the JuSt treatment have been presented. The current study extends the knowledge about the JuSt treatment in three aspects: Firstly, we were able to replicate the positive impact of the treatment on participants’ ability to initiate and maintain sleep and on sleep quality. Thus, the JuSt treatment turned out to be effective independent of the therapist. This is of course essential for its implementation in clinical practice. Thus, our results imply that, in the future, clinical psychologists and psychotherapists will be able to successfully integrate the JuSt treatment. As our sample included participants with comorbid mental disorders, conditions that practitioners often face in their clinical routine, our results indicate external validity of the intervention. This suggests that the JuSt treatment represents a promising and, given the good retention rate, a well-accepted intervention even in heterogeneous adolescent populations. Finally, the follow-up history of 12 months demonstrated long-term stability of the treatment effects. Previous educational or preventive studies on adolescent sleep report a follow-up history of six weeks at most; thus, our study goes well beyond previous assessments.

However, our results are limited by the pre-post design, and future research should compare the treatment’s effects to an active control group that includes supportive counseling. By implementing a dismantling approach, additive and/or synergetic effects of the treatment’s multimodal conception could be analyzed. In addition to self-report data, sleep parameter should be assessed using objective approaches, such as actigraphy, polysomnography, or even new apps, for example the sleep cycle alarm clock, if this method will prove reliable. Different settings should be evaluated, such as in- and outpatient treatment to investigate whether JuSt can be implemented into clinical routine. Future studies should include larger sample sizes and subgroup analysis, for example regarding the influence of ADHD and ADHD medication on treatment outcome. Furthermore, prospective studies should be conducted to investigate whether the JuSt treatment in adolescence can decrease the incidence of chronic insomnia in adults and prevent adverse effects on psychosocial functioning and health.

To conclude, a short-term intervention with elements of psycho-education and cognitive behavioral and hypnotic therapy reduces symptoms of behavioral insomnia. These improvements are stable over time and retention rates are good. The significant and sustainable improvement in the sleep of our unselected sample with heterogeneous diagnoses suggests a broad indication of the JuSt treatment. Thus, the JuSt treatment constitutes an effective and economic intervention that can be implemented by clinical psychologists and psychotherapists.

## A B B R E V I AT I O N S

ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
FR, feeling rested
ICSD, International Classification of Sleep Disorders
JuSt, Adolescent Sleep Training (Jugendlichen-Schlaftraining)
SE, sleep efficiency
SOL, sleep onset latency
WASO, wake after sleep onset 22. Schlarb AA, Liddle C, Hautzinger M. JuSt – a multimodal program for treatment of insomnia in adolescents: a pilot study. Nat Sci Sleep 2011;3:13–20
23. Bakotic M, Radosevic-Vidacek B, Koscec A. Educating adolescents about healthy sleep: experimental study of effectiveness of educational leaflet. Croat Med J 2009;50:174–81
24. Cortesi F, Giannotti F, Sebastiani T, Bruni O, Ottaviano S Knowledge of sleep in Italian high school students: pilot-test of a school-based sleep educational program. J Adolesc Health 2004;34:344–51
25. de Sousa IC, Araujo JF, de Azevedo CV. The effect of a sleep hygiene education program on the sleep-wake cycle of Brazilian adolescent students. Sleep Biol Rhythms 2007;5:251–8
26. Brown FC, Buboltz WC, Soper B. Development and evaluation of the Sleep Treatment and Education Program for Students (STEPS). J Am Coll Health 2006;54:231–37
27. Cain N, Gradisar M, Moseley L. A motivational school-based intervention for adolescent sleep problems. Sleep Med 2011;12:246–51
28. Wiggs L, France K. Behavioural treatments for sleep problems in children and adolescents with physical illness, psychological problems or intellectual disabilities. Sleep Med Rev 2000;4:299–314
29. Bootzin RR, Stevens SJ. Adolescents, substance abuse, and the treatment of insomnia and daytime sleepiness. Clin Psychol Rev 2005;25:629–44
30. Schlarb AA, Milicevic V. JuSt-improving sleep during adolescence: long-term effects of a multimodal treatment. J Sleep Res 2012;21:350
31. Cohen J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1988

32. Schlarb AA, Brandhorst I, Hautzinger M. Mini-KiSS – ein multimodales Gruppentherapieprogramm für Eltern von Kleinkindern mit Schlafstörungen [Mini-KiSS – a multimodal group therapy intervention for parents of young children with sleep disorders: a pilot study]. Z Kinder Jugendpsychiatr Psychother 2011;39:197–206
33. Schlarb AA, Velten-Schurian K, Poets CF, Hautzinger M. First effects of a multicomponent treatment for sleep disorders in children. Nat Sci Sleep 2011;3:1–11

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank the families for their participation and all current and former members of the Würzburg Children’s Sleep Project for their highly appreciated support

SUBMISSION & CORRESPONDENCE INFORMATION

Submitted for publication May, 2015
Submitted in final revised form August, 2015
Accepted for publication September, 2015
Address correspondence to: Dr. Karolin Roeser, Institute of Psychology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany; Tel: +49 931 31-81012; Fax: +49 931 31-82424; Email: karolin.roeser@uni-wuerzburg.de

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT

This was not an industry supported study. The authors have indicated no financial conflicts of interest 