# The short-term and long-term adverse effects of melatonin treatment in children and adolescents: a systematic review and GRADE assessment

## Summary

### Background
Currently, melatonin is used to treat children and adolescents with insomnia without knowing the full extent of the short-term and long-term consequences. Our aim was to provide clinicians and guideline panels with a systematic assessment of serious—and non-serious adverse events seen in continuation of melatonin treatment and the impact on pubertal development and bone health following long-term administration in children and adolescents with chronic insomnia.

### Methods
We searched PubMed, Embase, Cinahl and PsycINFO via Ovid, up to March 17, 2023, for studies on melatonin treatment among children and adolescents (aged 5–20 years) with chronic insomnia. The language was restricted to English, Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish. Outcomes were non-serious adverse events and serious adverse events assessed 2–4 weeks after initiating treatment and pubertal development and bone health, with no restriction on definition or time of measurement. Observational studies were included for the assessment of long-term outcomes, and serious and non-serious adverse events were assessed via randomised studies. The certainty of the evidence was assessed using Grades of Recommendation, Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE). The protocol is registered with the Danish Health Authority.

### Findings
We identified 22 randomised studies with 1350 patients reporting on serious—and non-serious adverse events and four observational studies with a total of 105 patients reporting on pubertal development. Melatonin was not associated with serious adverse events, yet the number of patients experiencing non-serious adverse events was increased (Relative risk 1.56, 95% CI 1.01–2.43, 17 studies, I² = 47%). Three studies reported little or no influence on pubertal development following 2–4 years of treatment, whereas one study registered a potential delay following longer treatment durations (>7 years). These findings need further evaluation due to several methodological limitations.

### Interpretation
Children who use melatonin are likely to experience non-serious adverse events, yet the actual extent to which melatonin leads to non-serious adverse events and the long-term consequences remain uncertain. This major gap of knowledge on safety calls for caution against complacent use of melatonin in children and adolescents with chronic insomnia and for more research to inform clinicians and guideline panels on this key issue. Funding
The Danish Health Authority. The Parker Institute, Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospital, supported by the Oak Foundation.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Keywords: Melatonin; Children and adolescents; Safety; Long-term effects

Research in context
Evidence before this study
The increased use of melatonin in children and adolescents, involving both off-label use and self-prescriptions, underlines the need for sufficient short-term and long-term safety data. However, systematic reviews on safety in children and adolescents are scarce and with current reviews largely focusing on narrative summaries. This hinders a general overview of the extent of adverse events in the young population.

Added value of this study
Our synthesis of the evidence shows, of moderate certainty, that children and adolescents treated with melatonin due to chronic insomnia are likely to experience non-serious adverse events, yet the actual extent of non-serious adverse events in the young population needs further assessment. Evidence of very low certainty indicates that the impact on pubertal development may rely on the duration of treatment. These findings are for now, however, only speculative. No studies were identified on bone health.

Implications of all the available evidence
The major gap of knowledge on safety identified through this analysis calls for caution against complacent use of melatonin in children and adolescents with chronic insomnia and for more research on this key issue.

Introduction
In children, sleep is vital for healthy development, optimal growth, emotional regulation, and mental health. Moreover, sleep influences the reconstruction, restoration and functioning of the brain and other tissues, including strengthening the immune system, improving cardiovascular functioning, and managing energy regulation. The consequences of chronic insomnia are serious and far-reaching, and among children the negative social, psychological, and physiological outcomes of sleep deficiency may persist into adulthood. Therefore, focus on promoting quality sleep remains an important public health issue already early in life, especially considering the worldwide high prevalence of insomnia among children.

Non-pharmacological interventions are first-line treatment of insomnia in children. Several non-pharmacological interventions have been proposed, with the overarching aim of introducing low-risk, non-invasive strategies with few side effects to promote healthy sleep. When non-pharmacological strategies have been tested, potential pharmacological therapies, such as melatonin may be considered. Registry and survey data from Scandinavia and Northern America show that melatonin supplementation is widely used among children with a substantial and a noteworthy increase in paediatric users over the last two decades, making melatonin a commonly used treatment in children. The increased use of melatonin in children and adolescents, involving both off-label use and self-prescriptions, underlines the need for safety data. for bone formation (osteoblast activity), but circulating concentrations of melatonin was not correlated with bone mineral content or bone mineral density. Whether long-term melatonin treatment among children and adolescents with chronic insomnia influences bone health is at this point uncertain.

Therefore, the aim of this systematic review was to provide clinicians and guideline panels with estimates on serious—and non-serious adverse events seen in continuation of melatonin treatment and the impact on pubertal development and bone health following long-term administration in children and adolescents with chronic insomnia. Rigorous standardised methods were used, including the Grades of Recommendation, Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) and the guidelines of the Cochrane collaboration. This review question is a part of national clinical recommendations on the use of melatonin for children and adolescents, published by the Danish Health Authority in November 2022.

Methodsfied protocol in Danish was registered and approved by management from the Department of Evidence Based Medicine at the Danish Health Authority on December 21, 2021 and is publicly available on the Danish Health Authority website at https://www.sst.dk/da/Udgivelser/2022/NKA_-Behandling-med-melatonin-ved-soevnforstyrrelser-hos-boern-og-unge. Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-analysis (PRISMA) were followed in the reporting of this systematic review.

Eligibility criteria
The a priori eligibility criteria follow the Population, Intervention, Comparison and Outcome (PICO) scheme. The population eligible for inclusion was children and adolescents (5–20 years of age) with chronic insomnia. The age band was chosen based on registry data showing that prescribed melatonin has increased substantially among those 5 years and above within the last decade, and children younger than 5 years who are being prescribed melatonin has remained stable in the same period. The intervention consisted of melatonin, with no restrictions on treatment dosage, duration of treatment, time of consumption or release formular. The comparison was either no treatment (or placebo) or non-pharmacological interventions. Outcomes were non-serious adverse events and serious adverse events assessed 2–4 weeks after initiating treatment and pubertal development and bone health, with no restriction on definition or time of measurement.

Information sources and search strategy
A systematic search was performed in three separate steps. A search for observational studies was performed in Medline, EMBASE, and PsycINFO via Ovid up to February 7th, 2023. A search for randomised studies was performed in Medline, EMBASE, Cinahl and PsycINFO via Ovid up to February 6th, 2023. Finally, a restricted search on adverse events, which included all types of studies, was performed in Medline, EMBASE and PsycINFO up to March 17th, 2023. The search included words with medical subject headings and free-text word. There was no restriction on date of publication, yet language was confined to English and Scandinavian languages. The search strategies are found in the Supplementary information. Observational studies were included for the assessment of long-term outcomes, whereas serious—and non-serious adverse events were assessed by means of randomised studies.

Selection process
The search was merged in RefWorks, and duplicates were removed, after which title and abstracts were imported to the Covidence software for final screening and selection. The title and abstracts were assessed by one reviewer (HKA or HEC), and if the abstract was classified as “include”, the study would proceed to the full-text review. Two reviewers (HKA, HEC or MNH) independently screened the studies that proceeded to full-text review according to the eligibility criteria (the PICO scheme described above). Any discrepancies were resolved through a consensus discussion. Conference abstracts were considered if data were not published elsewhere.

Data collection process, data items and bias assessment
Information extracted from each individual study included details on the study design, diagnosis, age of the participants, length of treatment, dosage, as well as information on the control condition and outcomes of interest. In Covidence, data extraction was performed in duplicate and independently by two reviewers (HEC and HKA). Risk of bias assessment by means of ROBINS-I for observational studies and Cochrane risk of bias tool for randomised studies was subsequently done in duplicate and independently (MNH, HEC and HKA). Discrepancy was resolved through discussion. Study investigators of the included studies were not contacted in case of missing data nor contacted regarding confirming data. Journal article(s), conference abstract(s), trial protocol or trial registry record were obtained as sources to inform the data extraction and the risk of bias assessment.

Statistical analyses
Serious–and non-serious events were estimated using relative risk (RR) and 95% confidence interval (CI). Forest plots were made in RevMan 5, version 5.3 (Cochrane collaboration), using inverse variance random-effects models assuming that the different ## Results

### Study selection

#### Serious–and non-serious adverse events
We identified 1109 references following the search for randomised studies. A total of 1087 studies did not meet inclusion and were excluded; 924 were excluded at title and abstract level, and 185 at full text level. Studies were excluded due to wrong study design (105 studies), wrong outcomes (36 studies) or wrong patient population (n = 22). The list of excluded studies at full text level is provided in the Supplementary. Finally, a total of 22 randomised studies reporting on adverse events were included.

#### Long-term outcome data
We identified 1387 references in the search for observational studies. A total of 1383 studies did not meet the inclusion criteria and were excluded; 1233 studies were excluded at title and abstract level, and 130 studies at full text level. Most studies were excluded due to wrong study design (78 studies) or wrong outcomes (24 studies). The list of excluded studies at full text level is provided in Supplementary. Finally, a total of four observational studies were included. The restricted search on adverse events provided with 1749 studies, of which 1695 were excluded on title and abstract level and 54 at full text level. This restricted search did not provide with any further relevant studies, which had not already been identified in the two initial searches mentioned above. The flowchart and list of excluded studies is provided in the Supplementary.

### Study characteristics
An overview of study characteristics can be found in Table 1 for the randomised controlled studies and in Table 2 for the observational studies. The 22 randomised studies reporting on serious and non-serious adverse events are based on a broad population consisting of 1350 participants with neurodevelopmental disorders, sleep–wake cycle disorder, tuberous sclerosis complex, fragile X syndrome/autism, autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactive disorder, atopic dermatitis, concussion, chronic sleep disorders, insomnia, Rett syndrome, and Delayed Sleep Phase disorder. The age of the participants ranged from 1 to 24 years. The melatonin dose varied from 0.5 to 15 mg, and the duration of treatment from 1 week to 3 months. The four observational studies investigating the effect of long-term melatonin treatment on pubertal development in 105 patients, consisted of a population who at enrolment were diagnosed with either neurodevelopmental disorders, autism or Smith-Magenis syndrome, or chronic Idiopathic Childhood Sleep Onset insomnia. Three of the studies are follow-up studies of earlier randomised studies. The study by Zwart et al. is a follow-up of the already included follow-up study. The age of the participants when starting melatonin varied from 2 to 18 years, and with the age at assessment ranging from 8.6 to 19.6 years of age. The average duration of treatment was between 1.4 and 10.8 years, and melatonin doses of 0.5–15 mg were used. Two studies examined pubertal development as measured by the Tanner score (either clinician assessed- or self-reported) compared to pubertal development in the general population in the Netherlands. In the two remaining studies, pubertal development was evaluated based on interviews provided by telephone or online. The basis of comparison was either a Norwegian background population or not reported.

### Synthesis
Eleven studies encompassing 855 participants reported on the number of patients experiencing serious adverse events. The results show that treatment with melatonin is most likely not associated with serious adverse events (RR 1.03 (CI 95% 0.58–1.86), I2 = 0% and (RD 0.00 (CI 95% −0.02 to 0.02), I2 = 0%), moderate = 0% Articles

References identified                                            Duplicates removed
(n = 1118)                                                        (n = 9)

Title and abstract                                         Excluded
screening                                             (n = 924)
(n = 1109)

Full text evaluation                                               Excluded
(n = 185)                                                   (n = 163)
Wrong study design (n = 105)
Wrong patient population (n = 22)
Wrong outcomes (n = 36)
Included randomised
studies
(n = 22)

Fig. 1: PRISMA flowchart for the screening of randomised studies.

References identified
(n = 1387)

Title and abstracts                                        Excluded
(n = 1367)                                           (n = 1233)

Full text                                                  Excluded
(n = 134)                                                   (n = 130)

Wrong study design (n= 78)

Wrong patient population (n= 3)
Included studies
(n = 4)                                         Wrong outcomes (n= 24)
Wrong intervention (n = 3)

Abstract: (n = 22)

Fig. 2: PRISMA flowchart for the screening of observational studies.

certainty) (Fig. 3 and Supplementary). An overview of                                 Seventeen studies encompassing 1017 participants
the type of serious adverse events reported in the eleven                        reported on the number of patients experiencing non-
randomised studies is found in the Supplementary.                                serious adverse events. The results show | Study/Country           | Diagnosis                        | Age range/Average age                   | Sex (male %)/ethnicity                       |
|-------------------------|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| Appleton 2012           | Neurodevelopmental disorders      | 3–15 years of age/8.8 years (2.9)     | Melatonin group: 70% males
Placebo group: 63% males
No information on ethnicity |
| Jain 2015               | Epilepsy                         | 6–11 years of age/8.4 years (1.3)     | Total: 70% males
Total: 90% caucasian    |
| Jan 2000                | Sleep-wake cycle disorder        | 1–11 years/5.4 years (no SD provided) | No information                                |
| Dodge 2001              | Developmental disabilities       | 1–12 years of age/7.4 years (no SD provided) | No information                                |
| Hancock 2005            | Tuberous sclerosis complex       | 1–19 years of age/no mean provided     | No information                                |
| Wirojanan 2009          | Fragile X syndrome/Autisme      | 2–15 years of age/5.47 years (3.6)    | Total: 88% males
No information on ethnicity |
| Wright 2011             | Autisme spectrum disorder        | 3–16 years of age/9 years (2.9)       | Total: 80% males
No information on ethnicity |
| Cortesi 2012            | Autisme spectrum disorder        | 4–10 years of age                      | Melatonin group: 82% males
Placebo group 84% males
Melatonin group: 100% Caucasian
Placebo group: 96% Caucasian |
| Gringas 2017            | Autisme spectrum disorder        | 2–17 years of age/8.7 years (4.15)    | Melatonin group: 45% males
Placebo group: 47% males
Melatonin group: 40% not Hispanic or latino
Placebo group: 49% not Hispanic or latino |
| Van der Heiden 2007     | ADHD                             | 6–12 years of age                      | Melatonin group: 35% males
Placebo group: 43% males
No information on ethnicity |
| Weiss 2006              | ADHD                             | 6–14 years of age/10.29 years (no SD provided) | Total: 90.9% males
Total: 87.9% Caucasian |
| Hayashi 2021            | Autisme spectrum disorder        | 6–15 years of age/11.2 years (2.5)    | Total: 61.7% males
No information on ethnicity |
| Taghavi Ardakani 2018   | Atopic dermatitis                | 6–12 years of age                      | Melatonin group: 45.7% males
Placebo group: 51.4% males
No information on ethnicity |
| Chang 2016              | Atopic dermatitis                | 1–18 years of age/7.5 years (3.7)     | Melatonin group: 54% females
Placebo group: 42% females
No information on ethnicity |
| Barlow 2021             | Postconcussion + sleep disabilities | 8–18 years of age                    | Melatonin group 10 mg: 64% females
Melatonin group 3 mg: 62% females
Placebo group: 59% females
No information on ethnicity |
| McArthur 1998           | Rett syndrome                    | Average age 10.1 years (no SD provided) | Total: 100% females                          |
| Wasdell 2008            | Neurodevelopmental disorders      | 2–18 years of age/7.38 years           | Total: 62% males
No information on ethnicity |
| Eckerberg 2012          | Idiopathic Chronic Sleep onset insomnia | 14–19 years of age (no average provided) | Total: 48% males
No information on ethnicity |
| Smits 2001              | Idiopathic Chronic Sleep onset insomnia | 6–12 years of age (no average provided) | Total: 70% males
No information on ethnicity |
| Smits 2003              | Idiopathic Chronic Sleep onset insomnia | 6–12 years of age/9.2 years (2.1)     | Total: 70% males
No information on ethnicity |

| Melatonin type/route of administration | Dosage       | Duration of treatment |
|----------------------------------------|--------------|-----------------------|
| Immediate release melatonin. Oral administration or nasogastric feeding tube or gastrostomy feeding tube if the patient was not able to feed orally | 0.5–12 mg    | 12 weeks              |
| Sustained release melatonin            | 9 mg         | 4 weeks               |
| No information                          | /            | /                     |
| No information on melatonin type       | 5 mg         | 4 weeks               |
| Immediate release melatonin            | 5–10 mg      | 2 weeks               |
| No information on melatonin type       | 3 mg         | 2 weeks               |
| Immediate release melatonin            | 10 mg        | 3 months              |
| Sustained release melatonin            | /            | 12 weeks              |
| Sustained release melatonin            | 2–5 mg       | 13 weeks              |
| Immediate release melatonin            | 3 or 6 mg    | 4 weeks               |
| Immediate release melatonin            | 5 mg         | 30 days               |
| No information on melatonin type       | 1–4 mg       | 14 days               |
| Immediate release melatonin            | 6 mg         | 6 weeks               |
| Immediate release melatonin            | 3 mg         | 4 weeks               |
| Controlled release melatonin           | 3 mg or 10 mg| 2 weeks               |
| Immediate release melatonin            | 2.5–7.5 mg   | 4 weeks               |
| Controlled release melatonin           | 5–15 mg      | 10 days               |
| Immediate release melatonin            | 1 mg         | 2 weeks               |
| Immediate release melatonin            | 5 mg         | 4 weeks               |
| Immediate release melatonin            | 5 mg         | 4 weeks               | | Study/Country            | Diagnosis                         | Age range/Average age                    | Sex (male %)/ethnicity              | Melatonin type/route of administration | Dosage                    | Duration of treatment |
|--------------------------|----------------------------------|------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|---------------------------|-----------------------|
| Van Geijlswijk 2010      | Idiopathic Chronic Sleep onset insomnia | 6–12 years of age                        | Total: 85% males                    | No information                          | Mean dosage 1.60/2.91/4.39 mg | 1 week                |
| The Netherlands          |                                  | 9.5 years (1.8)                          |                                     |                                        | Melatonin group 0.05 mg/kg: |                       |
|                          |                                  |                                          |                                     |                                        | Melatonin group 0.1 mg/kg:  |                       |
|                          |                                  |                                          |                                     |                                        | 8.9 years (1.4)          |                       |
|                          |                                  |                                          |                                     |                                        | Melatonin group 0.15 mg/kg: |                       |
|                          |                                  |                                          |                                     |                                        | 8.7 years (1.4)          |                       |
|                          |                                  |                                          |                                     |                                        | Placebo group: 8.7 years (2.8) |                       |
| Wilhelmsen-langeland 2013 | Delayed sleep phase disorder     | 16–24 years of age                       | Total: 30% males                    | Immediate release melatonin            | 3 mg                      | 4 weeks               |
| Norway                   |                                  |                                          |                                     | Oral administration                     |                           |                       |

SD: Standard deviation, CI: Confidence interval; mg: Milligram; ADHD: Attention deficits hyperactive disorder.

Table 1: Characteristics of the included randomised controlled trials.

| Reference, country/region | Study design | Population and diagnosis | Age of assessment, sex (% female), Ethnicity | Outcomes/Assessment method | Dosage, type |
|---------------------------|--------------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|----------------------------|---------------|
| Carr et al., 2007, The Netherlands | Follow-up study of Wasdell 2008 (RCT) | 41 participants with neurodevelopmental disability (NDD). Included mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, visual impairment (none completely blind) and autistic spectrum disorders. | Median age 8.6 years (range 4.8–19.3 years), Sex: 31.7, Ethnicity: not reported | Pubertal development. | Mean dose 10.4 mg (SD 5.2) (range 5–15 mg), beaded sustained-release (1 mg fast and 4 mg controlled release) and later melatonin supplier replaced controlled-release melatonin (5 mg) with fast release (5 mg) formulation |
| Malow et al., 2021, United States and Europe | Follow-up study of Gringas (2017) (RCT) | 31 participants with Autism Spectrum Disorder (96%) and Smith-Magenis syndrome | Mean age 9 years (SD 4.2). Range 2–17 years. Sex: 25, Ethnicity: Not Hispanic or Latino (66.7%), Hispanic or Latino (20.0%), Other (13.3%) | Pubertal development. | Range 2–10 mg, PedPRM assessed by a Physician in children≥8 years using Tanner pubertal staging score. |
| vanGeijlswijk et al., 2011, The Netherlands | Follow-up study of vanGeijlswik 2010 (RCT) | 19 participants with Chronic idiopathic childhood sleep onset insomnia | Mean age 12.0 years (range 8.6–15.7 years), Sex: Group 1: 44, Group 2: 74, Group 3: 44, Group 4: 65 | Pubertal development. | Mean dose 2.7 mg (range 0.3–10 mg), type not reported |
| Zwart et al., 2017, The Netherlands | Follow-up study of vanGeijlswik 2010 and 2011 (RCT) | 33 participants with Chronic idiopathic childhood sleep onset insomnia | Mean age 19.6 years (range 16.7–23.2 years), Sex: 57.6, Ethnicity: not reported | Pubertal development. | Range 0.5–5 mg, type not reported |

RCT: Randomised controlled trial; yr: Year; SD: Standard deviation; mg: Milligram; MT: Melatonin; NDD: Neurodevelopmental disorder.

| Length of treatment | Comparator | Comments |
|---------------------|------------|----------|
| Mean 4.3 years (range 2–12 years) | Not reported | The median age of the onset of puberty was 11.5 years (range 2—15 years). Precocious puberty developed in five children who had severe NDD, all prior to the MT therapy, at ages 2, 3, 4, 6 and 7 years. In the others with signs of puberty the onset was age appropriate (mean (±S.D.) age: 13.4 (±1.4) years). |
| Mean 1.4 years (Range 3 days* to 2 years) | Control population matched on age and sex | The study shows no delay in sexual maturation after 2 yr of continuous use of prolonged release melatonin. |
| Mean 3.1 years (range 1.0–4.6 years) | Control population matched on age and sex | Puberty onset, as assessed by Tanner scores, seems to be undisturbed after 3.1 yr of exogenous melatonin usage. |
| Mean duration of treatment 10.8 years. | Control population (Bratberg et al., 2007) | The perceived timing of pubertal development suggested a tendency towards delayed puberty. Overall average duration of treatment was 7.1 years. |

Table 2: Characteristics of the included observational studies. | Study o_Subgroup                    | Melatonin Events | Placebo Events | Risk Ratio MH Random 95% CI | Risk Ratio MH Random 95% CI | Risk of Bias |
|-------------------------------------|------------------|----------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|--------------|
| Dodge 2001                          | 29               | Not estimable  |                              |                              |              |
| Weiss 2006                          |                  | Not estimable  |                              |                              |              |
| Wright 2011                         |                  | Not estimable  |                              |                              |              |
| Ardakani 2018                       |                  | Not estimable  |                              |                              |              |
| Jan 2000                            |                  | Not estimable  |                              |                              |              |
| Vilhelmsen-Langeland 2013          |                  | Not estimable  |                              |                              |              |
| Wvasdell 2008                       | 0.34             | [0.01, 8.15]   |                              |                              |              |
| Appleton 2012                       | 16.19            | [0.19, 3.51]   |                              |                              |              |
| Gringras 2017                       | 73.39            | [0.55, 2.15]   |                              |                              |              |
| Barlow 2021                         | 3.49             | [0.05, 30.54]  |                              |                              |              |
| Hayashi 2021                        | 130              | 3.89           | [0.12, 52.51]                |                              |              |
| Total (952, CI)                    | 466              | 389            | 100.026                      | [0.58, 1.86]                |              |

Total events
Heterogeneity Tau = 0.00; Chi² = 0.96, df = (P= 0.92). F= 0%
Test for overall effect Z= 0.11 (P= 0.91)

Risk of bias legend
- Random sequence generation (selection bias)
- Allocation concealment (selection bias)
- Blinding of participants and personnel (performance bias)
- Blinding of outcome assessment (detection bias)
- Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
- Selective reporting (reporting bias)
- Other bias

The number of patients experiencing non-serious adverse events is increased following intake of melatonin (RR 1.56 (CI 95% 1.01–2.43), I² = 47%, and RD 0.06 (CI 95% 0.01–0.10), I² = 36%, moderate certainty). Of the 17 included studies, nine of these specified various non-serious adverse events, such as headache, nausea, red cheeks, red earlobes, sore/red eyes, fatigue/drowsiness, dizziness, vomiting, influenza symptoms/infections, change in mood/cognition, musculoskeletal pain and gastrointestinal problems. The effect of melatonin on non-serious adverse events was unaffected by age, sex, duration, release type, and dose.

It was not possible to make a meta-analysis for pubertal development due to the format the data was given in. The results are therefore described narratively. In the study by Malow et al., 2021 (n = 31) and Carr et al., 2017 (n = 41), no delay in pubertal development was found after an average of 2 and 4.3 years of continuous use of melatonin, respectively. In the study by van Geijlswijk et al., 2011, pubertal onset seemed to be undisturbed after 3.1 years of melatonin treatment (n = 19). However, when the same population was later evaluated in the study by Zwart et al., 2018, a tendency towards delayed pubertal timing was observed. At this point, the participants had received treatment with melatonin for an average of 7.1 years.

No studies were identified that reported on bone mineral density or risk of fractures.

Certainty in the evidence regarding serious as well as non-serious adverse events as reported in randomised studies is moderate due to an imprecise effect estimate (wide confidence interval). The risk of bias evaluation is seen in the forest plots. For long-term outcome data assessed in observational studies, the certainty is very low, due to serious risk of bias (serious risk of bias due to confounding, serious risk of bias due to deviations from the intended interventions, serious risk of bias due to missing data and serious risk of bias in measurement of outcomes) and risk of imprecision (few patients included). The control group for two of the observational studies is based on other previously published material.

Discussion
Our systematic review that followed the standardised and transparent GRADE method revealed that treatment with melatonin in children and adolescents is not associated with an increase in serious adverse events such as death, hospitalisation, or significant disability/incapacity. However, we found that it is likely to experience a range of non-serious adverse events. | Study or Subgroup                      | Melatonin Events | Total Events | Placebo Events | Total | Weight | MH Random 95% CI | MH Random 95% CI | Risk of Bias |
|----------------------------------------|------------------|--------------|----------------|-------|--------|------------------|------------------|--------------|
| Wirojanan 2009                         | 12               | Not estimable |                |       |        |                  |                  |              |
| McArthur 1998                          |                  | Not estimable |                |       |        |                  |                  |              |
| Dodge 2001                             |                  |              |                |       |        |                  |                  |              |
| Colesi 2012b                           |                  | Not estimable |                |       |        |                  |                  |              |
| Comesi 2012a                           |                  | Not estimable |                |       |        |                  |                  |              |
| Hancock 2005                           | 3                | Not estimable |                |       |        |                  |                  |              |
| Chang 2016                             |                  | Not estimable |                |       |        |                  |                  |              |
| Wilhelmsen-Langeland 2013             |                  | 10.8%        |                |       |        | [0.34,2.93]      |                  |              |
| Gringras 2017                          |                  | 29.29        |                |       |        | [0.93,]         |                  |              |
| Hayashi 2021                           | 23               | 13           | 19.3%          | 18    |        | [0.65,]         |                  |              |
| Barlow 2021                            |                  |              |                |       |        |                  |                  |              |
| Jain 2015                              |                  |              |                |       |        |                  |                  |              |
| van Geijlswijk 2010                   |                  |              |                |       |        |                  |                  |              |
| Smits 2003                             |                  |              |                |       |        |                  |                  |              |
| Smits 2001                             |                  |              |                |       |        |                  |                  |              |
| Eckerberg 2012                         | 1                |              | 16.4%          | 2.1%  |        | [0.13,43.04]    |                  |              |
| van der Heijden 2007                  |                  |              | 2.3%           | 20.61 |        | [1.24,342.90]    |                  |              |
| **Total (95% CI)**                    | 570              | 447          | 100.0%         | 0    |        | [1.01,2.43]     |                  |              |
| **Total events**                      | 135              |              |                |       |        |                  |                  |              |
| **Heterogeneity**                     | Tau² = 0.17; Chi² = 16.94, df =  (P = 0.05); I² = 479 | 0.001 | 1000 | | | | | |
| **Test for overall effect**           | Z = 99 (P = 0.05) |              |                |       |        |                  |                  |              |

Risk of bias legend:
- A) Random sequence generation (selection bias)
- B) Allocation concealment (selection bias)
- C) Blinding of participants and personnel (performance bias)
- D) Blinding of outcome assessment (detection bias)
- E) Incomplete outcome data (attrition bias)
- F) Selective reporting (reporting bias)
- G) Other bias

The certainty of the evidence for non-serious adverse events was downgraded to moderate due to a wide confidence interval, indicating some level of uncertainty regarding the extent to which melatonin leads to non-serious adverse events. On this notion, the discrepancy across studies is noteworthy, as some studies reported a substantial number of adverse events, whereas others reported no adverse events in either the melatonin or placebo group. The current assessment of serious—and non-serious adverse events is based on few patients and with the majority of studies performed in a population with an underlying disorder, which may hinder the possibility to identify any subtle effects. The identified studies only rarely performed a systematic evaluation of adverse events, and with even fewer studies providing a full report on the frequency and type of adverse events that occurred throughout the trial period. Overall, this

| Author/year                   | Bias due to confounding | Bias in selection of participants into the study | Bias in classification of interventions | Bias due to deviations from the intended interventions | Bias due to missing data | Bias in measurement of outcomes | Bias in selection of the reported results | Overall bias |
|-------------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|--------------|
| Carr 2007                     | NI                      | Low                                             | Low                                   | Serious                                             | Low                     | Serious                          | Low                                       | Serious      |
| Malow 2021                    | Serious                 | Low                                             | Low                                   | NI                                                  | Serious                 | Serious                          | Low                                       | Serious      |
| van Geijlswijk 2011          | Serious                 | Low                                             | Low                                   | NI                                                  | Serious                 | Serious                          | Low                                       | Serious      |
| Zwart 2017                    | Serious                 | Low                                             | Low                                   | Serious                                             | NI                      | Serious                          | Low                                       | Serious      |

NI: No information.

Table 3: Risk of bias (ROBINS-I) of the included observational studies. scarcity of data indicates that adverse events in chil-
dren and adolescents may be underreported and/or
insufficiently investigated and thus further studies on
safety in children and adolescents are highly needed.
Current evidence reports that melatonin treatment
may have little or no influence on later pubertal devel-
opment after 2–4 years of treatment, whereas one study
showed a trend towards a delay in pubertal development
in participants who on average had been treated with
melatonin for 7.1 years. This may indicate that the
length of treatment is essential when it comes to the
impact on pubertal development in young individuals.
These findings are for now, however, only speculative as
the certainty of evidence is very low, as results are based
on few patients, and with a serious risk of bias due to
risk of confounding, incomplete follow-up and a highly
questionable validity on how pubertal development was
measured. Only one of the identified studies made use
of a physician-rated Tanner score and with results
compared to a group of peers published elsewhere. For
the remaining studies, the impact on development was
assessed based on either a telephone interview or
questionnaire with the parents or participants. As
such, apart from one study, the current findings in large
rely on subjective rather than objective evaluations of
pubertal development, which inevitably introduces a
concern in the robustness of these results. The age of
the participants when initiating melatonin varied from 2
to 18 years, thus including both prepubescent and
postpubescent participants. To better address the impact
on pubertal development, objective measures in solely
prepubescent participants is needed.
Melatonin is associated with the overall bone
remodelling process through indirect and direct stimu-
latory actions on both osteoblasts and osteoclasts and
potentially also through effects on the gonadal hormone
axis (pituritary-gonodal), and thus is considered to hold
the potential of long-term bone health and clinical pre-
vention of bone-related diseases. Bearing this in mind,
this may also be the reason that the literature on mela-
tonin and bone metabolism, up until now, has primarily
focused on the therapeutic role of melatonin in osteo-
porosis prevention and treatment. From our review
we can confirm that the role of melatonin on paediatric
and pubertal bone development still needs to be eluci-
dated, as we did not identify any studies that reported on
the association between long-term melatonin treatment
and bone outcomes in our search for literature.
This systematic review was conducted in accordance
with the current highest standards within systematic
review methodology, including a pre-specified protocol,
a highly sensitive search strategy, the screening, data
extraction and risk of bias assessment were conducted
by two independent review authors, and the certainty in
the evidence was considered during interpretation of the
results. The major limitation of this systematic review
is that the planned meta-analysis on long-term out-
comes was not deemed possible, due to small number
of included studies with very heterogeneous reporting of
results. Therefore, we cannot at this point provide a
reliable and robust effect estimate of long-term mela-
tonin treatment. The risk of bias assessment of the
included studies was limited by what was reported, and
thus we may have overestimated risk of bias. Trial reg-
istries, observational studies or grey literature were not
assessed in the evaluation of serious—and non-serious
adverse events.
In the Scandinavian countries, melatonin is a pre-
scription medication, and we have access to public data
sources to inform on use through the national pre-
scription registers. Although we acknowledge that
information on the incidence of central precocious pu-
berty, premature thelarche and premature adrenarche,
as well as fracture events are available in the national
patient registries, routine pubertal development assess-
ment or dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scans
are unfortunately not available in the health registries.
Collected cohort data may be insufficiently powered to
study such associations, so new cohorts should be
established with the aim of exploring melatonin treat-
ment from a life course perspective.
Taken together, melatonin is a commonly used
treatment in children and adolescents with insomnia,
and therefore concerns have been raised regarding the
short-term and long-term adverse consequences.
Patients are likely to experience non-serious adverse
events, however the actual extent to which melatonin
leads to non-serious adverse events in the young popu-
lation and the impact on pubertal development remains
uncertain. No studies were identified on bone health.
This major gap of knowledge on short-term and long-
term safety of melatonin treatment in children and ad-
olescents calls for cautious use and for more research to
inform clinicians and guideline panels on this key issue.
Contributors
The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: study design: all authors, data collection: HEC, HKA, MNH; analysis of results: HEC, HKA, MNH; interpretation of results: all authors; draft of manuscript: MNH, HEC and HKA. All authors reviewed and approved the final version of the manuscript. HEC, HKA and MNH accessed and verified the underlying data.
Data sharing statement
Data and all other relevant materials are publicly available either at the Danish Health Authority website or upon request to the corresponding author.
Declaration of interests
LB is a member of the Danish medication reimbursement committee. AV has previously received honoraria for lectures at AGB pharma, Takeda & Medice, and holds stocks at Novo Nordisk. All other authors declare no competing interests. Statements of conflicts of interests can be found for all members of the guideline panel, the external reviewer of the national clinical guideline, the reference–and project group at the Danish Health Authority website. Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the reference group, guideline panel and the secretary of the “National clinical recommendation for the use of melatonin in children and adolescents with chronic insomnia” published by the Danish Health Authority. The Parker Institute, Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospital, is supported by a core grant from the Oak Foundation (OCAY-18-774-OFIL).

Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2023.102083. Articles

| Article Number | Authors | Title | Journal | Year | Volume | Pages |
|----------------|---------|-------|---------|------|--------|-------|
| 40 | Higgins JP, Altman DG, Gotzsche PC, et al. | The Cochrane Collaboration’s tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials. | BMJ | 2011 | 343 | d5928 |
| 41 | Campbell M, McKenzie JE, Sowden A, et al. | Synthesis without meta-analysis (SWiM) in systematic reviews: reporting guideline. | BMJ | 2020 | 368 | l6890 |
| 42 | Appleton RE, Jones AP, Gamble C, et al. | The use of MElatonin in children with neurodevelopmental disorders and impaired sleep: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel study (MENDS). | Health Technol Assess | 2012 | 16(40) | i–239 |
| 43 | Dodge NN, Wilson GA. | Melatonin for treatment of sleep disorders in children with developmental disabilities. | J Child Neurol | 2001 | 16(8) | 581–584 |
| 44 | Wasdell MB, Jan JE, Bomben MM, et al. | A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of controlled release melatonin treatment of delayed sleep phase syndrome and impaired sleep maintenance in children with neurodevelopmental disabilities. | J Pineal Res | 2008 | 44(1) | 57–64 |
| 45 | Jain SV, Horn PS, Simakajornboon N, et al. | Melatonin improves sleep in children with epilepsy: a randomized, double-blind, crossover study. | Sleep Med | 2015 | 16(5) | 637–644 |
| 46 | Jan MM. | Melatonin for the treatment of handicapped children with severe sleep disorders. | Pediatr Neurol | 2000 | 23(3) | 229–232 |
| 47 | Hancock E, O’Callaghan F, English J, Osborne JP. | Melatonin excretion in normal children and in tuberous sclerosis complex with sleep disorder responsive to melatonin. | J Child Neurol | 2005 | 20(1) | 21–25 |
| 48 | Wirojanan J, Jacquemont S, Diaz R, et al. | The efficacy of melatonin for sleep problems in children with autism, fragile X syndrome, or autism and fragile X syndrome. | J Clin Sleep Med | 2009 | 5(2) | 145–150 |
| 49 | Wright B, Sims D, Smart S, et al. | Melatonin versus placebo in children with autism spectrum conditions and severe sleep problems not amenable to behaviour management strategies: a randomised controlled crossover trial. | J Autism Dev Disord | 2011 | 41(2) | 175–184 |
| 50 | Cortesi F, Giannotti F, Sebastiani T, Panunzi S, Valente D. | Controlled-release melatonin, singly and combined with cognitive behavioural therapy, for persistent insomnia in children with autism spectrum disorders: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. | J Sleep Res | 2012 | 21(6) | 700–709 |
| 51 | Gringras P, Nir T, Breddy J, Frydman-Marom A, Findling RL. | Efficacy and safety of pediatric prolonged-release melatonin for insomnia in children with autism spectrum disorder. | J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry | 2017 | 56(11) | 948–957 |
| 52 | Hayashi M, Mishima K, Fukumizu M, et al. | Melatonin treatment and adequate sleep hygiene interventions in children with autism spectrum disorder: a randomized controlled trial. | J Autism Dev Disord | 2022 | 52(6) | 2784–2793 |
| 53 | van der Heijden KB, Smits MG, Van Someren EJ, Ridderinkhof KR, Gunning WB. | Effect of melatonin on sleep, behavior, and cognition in ADHD and chronic sleep-onset insomnia. | J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry | 2007 | 46(2) | 233–241 |
| 54 | Weiss MD, Wasdell MB, Bomben MM, Rea KJ, Freeman RD. | Sleep hygiene and melatonin treatment for children and adolescents with ADHD and initial insomnia. | J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry | 2006 | 45(5) | 512–519 |
| 55 | Taghavi AA, Farrehi M, Sharif MR, et al. | The effects of melatonin administration on disease severity and sleep quality in children with atopic dermatitis: a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial. | Pediatr Allergy Immunol | 2018 | 29(8) | 834–840 |
| 56 | Chang YS, Lin MH, Lee JH, et al. | Melatonin supplementation for children with atopic dermatitis and sleep disturbance: a randomized clinical trial. | JAMA Pediatr | 2016 | 170(1) | 35–42 |
| 57 | Barlow KM, Kirk V, Brooks B, et al. | Efficacy of melatonin for sleep disturbance in children with persistent post-concussion symptoms: secondary analysis of a randomized controlled trial. | J Neurotrauma | 2021 | 38(8) | 950–959 |
| 58 | McArthur AJ, Budden SS. | Sleep dysfunction in Rett syndrome: a trial of exogenous melatonin treatment. | Dev Med Child Neurol | 1998 | 40(3) | 186–192 |
| 59 | Eckerberg B, Lowden A, Nagai R, Akerstedt T. | Melatonin treatment effects on adolescent students’ sleep timing and sleepiness in a placebo-controlled crossover study. | Chronobiol Int | 2012 | 29(9) | 1239–1248 |
| 60 | Smits MG, van Stel HF, Van der Heijden K, Meijer AM, Coenen AM, Kerkhof GA. | Melatonin improves health status and sleep in children with idiopathic chronic sleep-onset insomnia: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. | J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry | 2003 | 42(11) | 1286–1293 |
| 61 | Smits MG, Nagtegaal EE, van der Heijden J, Coenen AM, Kerkhof GA. | Melatonin for chronic sleep onset insomnia in children: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. | J Child Neurol | 2001 | 16(2) | 86–92 |
| 62 | van Geijlswijk IM, van der Heijden KB, Egberts AC, Korzilius HP, Smits MG. | Dose finding of melatonin for chronic idiopathic childhood sleep onset insomnia: an RCT. | Psychopharmacology (Berl) | 2010 | 212(3) | 379–391 |
| 63 | Wilhelmsen-Langeland A, Saxvig IW, Pallesen S, et al. | A randomized controlled trial with bright light and melatonin for the treatment of delayed sleep phase disorder: effects on subjective and objective sleepiness and cognitive function. | J Biol Rhythms | 2013 | 28(5) | 306–321 |
| 64 | Carr R, Wasdell MB, Hamilton D, et al. | Long-term effectiveness outcome of melatonin therapy in children with treatment-resistant circadian rhythm sleep disorders. | J Pineal Res | 2007 | 43(4) | 351 |
| 65 | Zwart TC, Smits MG, Egberts TCG, Rademaker CMA, van Geijlswijk IM. | Long-term melatonin therapy for adolescents and young adults with chronic sleep onset insomnia and late melatonin onset: evaluation of sleep quality, chronotype, and lifestyle factors compared to age-related randomly selected population cohorts. | Healthcare (Basel) | 2018 | 6(1) | 23 |
| 66 | Munmun F, Witt-Enderby PA. | Melatonin effects on bone: implications for use as a therapy for managing bone loss. | J Pineal Res | 2021 | 71(1) | e12749 |
| 67 | Li T, Jiang S, Lu C, et al. | Melatonin: another avenue for treating osteoporosis? | J Pineal Res | 2019 | 66(2) | e12548 |
| 68 | Lu X, Yu S, Chen G, et al. | Insight into the roles of melatonin in bone tissue and bone-related diseases (Review). | Int J Mol Med | 2021 | 47(5) | 82 |
| 69 | Cardinali DP, Ladizesky MG, Boggio V, Cutrera RA, Mautalen C. | Melatonin effects on bone: experimental facts and clinical perspectives. | J Pineal Res | 2003 | 34(2) | 81–87 |
| 70 | Tian Y, Ming J. | The role of circadian rhythm in osteoporosis; a review. | Front Cell Dev Biol | 2022 | 10 | 960456 |
| 71 | Maria S, Witt-Enderby PA. | Melatonin effects on bone: potential use for the prevention and treatment for osteopenia, osteoporosis, and periodontal disease and for use in bone-grafting procedures. | J Pineal Res | 2014 | 56(2) | 115–125 |
| 72 | Furu K, Wettermark B, Andersen M, Martikainen JE, Almarsdottir AB, Sorensen HT. | The Nordic countries as a cohort for pharmacoepidemiological research. | Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol | 2010 | 106(2) | 86–94 | 