# Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Randomized Controlled Trial

## Study Objectives
Examine whether cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) improves sleep in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as well as nightmares, nonsleep PTSD symptoms, depression symptoms, and psychosocial functioning.

## Design
Randomized controlled trial with two arms: CBT-I and monitor-only waitlist control.

## Setting
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Medical Center.

## Participants
Forty-five adults (31 females: [mean age 37 y (22-59 y)] with PTSD meeting research diagnostic criteria for insomnia, randomly assigned to CBT-I (n = 29; 22 females) or monitor-only waitlist control (n = 16; nine females).

## Interventions
Eight-session weekly individual CBT-I delivered by a licensed clinical psychologist or a board-certified psychiatrist.

## Measurements and Results
Measures included continuous monitoring of sleep with diary and actigraphy; prepolysomnography and postpolysomnography and Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS); and pre, mid, and post self-report questionnaires, with follow-up of CBT-I participants 6 mo later. CBT-I was superior to the waitlist control condition in all sleep diary outcomes and in polysomnography-measured total sleep time. Compared to waitlist participants, CBT-I participants reported improved subjective sleep (41% full remission versus 0%), disruptive nocturnal behaviors (based on the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index-Addendum), and overall work and interpersonal functioning. These effects were maintained at 6-mo follow-up. Both CBT-I and waitlist control participants reported reductions in PTSD symptoms and CAPS-measured nightmares.

## Conclusions
Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) improved sleep in individuals with posttraumatic stress disorder, with durable gains at 6 mo. Overall psychosocial functioning improved following CBT-I. The initial evidence regarding CBT-I and nightmares is promising but further research is needed. Results suggest that a comprehensive approach to treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder should include behavioral sleep medicine.

## Clinical Trial Information
Trial Name: Cognitive Behavioral Treatment Of Insomnia In Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. Registration Number: NCT00881647.

## Keywords
Insomnia, cognitive behavioral therapy, posttraumatic stress disorder

## INTRODUCTION
As many as 90% of individuals with posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) report nightmares and insomnia. More specifically, sleep disturbance strongly correlates with PTSD symptom severity, worsens daytime PTSD symptoms, and may contribute to comorbid psychiatric problems, given that untreated insomnia is associated with prospective risk for major depression. Insomnia in PTSD is also associated with an increased risk for physical health complaints, which is not unexpected given that in the general population chronic and severe insomnia are associated with increased risk for hypertension and/or cardiovascular disease and immunosuppression. Finally, sleep disturbance in PTSD is also associated with a reduced capacity to carry out daily activities, again aligning with insomnia-related problems in the general population including functional impairment, cognitive impairment, and doubled risk of accidents. Notably, sleep disturbance frequently does not improve after otherwise successful first-line PTSD treatment, and disturbed sleep is one of the two most reported residual symptoms. In particular, insomnia is highly prevalent in individuals who have received treatment for PTSD, with one report demonstrating that residual insomnia is found in approximately 50% of patients treated with PTSD-specific cognitive behavior therapy. The persistence of sleep disturbance in PTSD and its consequences indicate that treatments targeting sleep are necessary. Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I), a psychological and behavioral treatment with well-established efficacy, is a promising candidate for several reasons. First, CBT-I is indicated for the treatment of chronic and severe insomnia, as it is delivered as a short-term intervention and produces long-term clinical gains. In contrast, pharmacologic treatments appear to treat insomnia less effectively, do not have much efficacy data beyond 6 mo, and have not been tested as maintenance therapies. Second, CBT-I has received substantial empirical support for the treatment of insomnia that co-occurs with psychiatric or medical disorders, including depression, cancer, alcoholism, and chronic pain. Third, Spielman and colleagues’ behavioral model likely applies to PTSD in that experiencing acute trauma exposure may act as a precipitating factor for acute insomnia, but the chronic form of the disorder is likely maintained in part by behavioral factors independent from PTSD-specific phenomena such as trauma-initiated fear conditioning and hyperarousal.

Few studies have examined the efficacy of nonpharmacological interventions for insomnia experienced by individuals with PTSD. DeViva and colleagues examined the effectiveness of a five-session CBT-I trial in a case series of five patients with PTSD who had completed a trial of PTSD-specific CBT. CBT-I treatment resulted in improvements in sleep onset latency, wake after sleep onset, total sleep time, sleep efficiency, and sleep quality on subjective measures. Several other studies have examined the effect of imagery rehearsal (IR) therapy with added CBT-I components in a group or individual format. Several of these studies demonstrated some improvement in subjective sleep and PTSD symptoms. One recent study examined a combined CBT-I and IR therapy in a sample of 22 veterans with PTSD. The CBT-I/IR group demonstrated large treatment effects for subjective insomnia severity and sleep quality compared to the waitlist control group and improvement in self-reported PTSD symptoms, but no improvement in PTSD-specific disruptive nocturnal behaviors. A second recent study compared a behavioral sleep intervention that included nightmare education and IR to prazosin and placebo in 50 military veterans with sleep disturbance and stress-related psychiatric symptoms. Both the prazosin and behavioral sleep treatment groups showed reductions in subjective insomnia severity and nightmare frequency posttreatment, and all three treatment groups (including placebo) had improvements in PTSD symptoms.

To date, no studies have examined the effect of CBT-I in PTSD in a pure format; that is, without the addition of a nightmare-targeted treatment. If such a treatment were effective in treating sleep disturbance, nightmares, and PTSD symptoms, it might confer several practical advantages over a treatment that involves a focus on nightmares. First, and most importantly, IR may be specific to a subgroup of patients with PTSD with stereotypic repetitive nightmares. Individuals without nightmares or without stereotypic repetitive nightmares are unlikely to benefit from IR therapy and the inclusion of nonrelevant information in the protocol could decrease their treatment adherence or completion. Moreover, for individuals with stereotypic repetitive nightmares, it is essential that the treatment is tailored to their specific needs.

METHODS

Participants

Study participants were recruited from May 2009 to March 2012 through Internet postings and contact with relevant clinicians and community resources in the San Francisco Bay area. Study participants included individuals between the ages of 18 and 65 y who (1) had chronic PTSD of at least 3 mo duration based on Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV) diagnostic criteria or partial PTSD operationalized as a past diagnosis of PTSD plus at least one current B symptom and either the C cluster criteria or the D cluster criteria (n = 40 met full criteria for PTSD and n = 5 met partial criteria, of which three were in CBT-I and two in waitlist control); (2) were currently in treatment for PTSD that could include medication therapy or enrollment in a specialized PTSD program or individual psychotherapy with a licensed clinician and had been in one of more of these treatments for at least 3 mo; additionally, participants’ medication must have been stable for at least 1 mo prior to baseline assessments and participants in psychotherapy needed to have no plans to discontinue psychotherapy or start new psychotherapy during the course of CBT-I; and (3) had persistent insomnia as defined by meeting research diagnostic criteria (RDC) for insomnia. Exclusion criteria were (1) presence of conditions or substances associated with comorbid insomnia independent to PTSD, including lifetime history of any psychiatric disorder with psychotic features and bipolar disorder and alcohol or substance abuse or dependence in the past year; (2) current exposure to a recurrent trauma or exposure to a traumatic event within the past 3 mo; (3) pregnancy; (4) diagnosis of sleep apnea, neurologic disorder, systemic illness affecting central nervous system function, and/or anemia; (5) prominent suicidal or homicidal ideation; (6) reports that insomnia began or worsened after starting selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor therapy; (7) history of sleep restriction therapy or cognitive restructuring therapies of beliefs related to sleep; (8) current prescriptions for benzodiazepine or benzodiazepine receptor agonists, opiates, or trazodone, or the use of over-the-counter sleep aids; (9) termination of benzodiazepine or benzodiazepine receptor agonists, anticonvulsants, atypical antipsychotic medication, antidepressant medications in the past 2 w or plans to start these medications during the course of CBT-I; (10) night shift work, in order to avoid the effect of circadian factors on evaluating insomnia; (11) unstable housing; and (12) nonclinically significant or sub-threshold insomnia, as indicated by a score of 0-14 on the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI).

Of the 893 individuals who contacted the recruitment line, 321 participants completed the institutional review board-approved telephone screen. Two hundred forty-one participants were ineligible after telephone screening for the following reasons: medication type or unstable current medication (n = 63); not currently in treatment for PTSD via either specialized PTSD program or individual therapy with a licensed clinician for at least three months (n = 55); pregnancy or diagnosis of sleep apnea, neurologic disorder, or central nervous system illness (n = 36); no longer interested in the study (n = 30); alcohol or substance abuse or dependence in the past year (n = 22); lifetime history of a psychiatric disorder with psychotic features or bipolar disorder (n = 11); no trauma history (n = 8); nonclinically significant insomnia (n = 6); unstable housing (n = 3); out of age range (n = 2); current exposure to a recurrent trauma or exposure to a traumatic event within the past 3 mo (n = 2); history of sleep restriction therapy or cognitive restructuring therapies of beliefs related to sleep (n = 1); night shift work (n = 1); and prominent suicidal ideation (n = 1).

Eighty participants met initial eligibility criteria based on the telephone screen and were invited for comprehensive second-stage screening. Second-stage screening included the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID), the Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS), a portion of the Duke Structured Interview for Sleep Disorders (DSISD), a medical history interview, a blood draw, and a urine screen. Thirty-five individuals were excluded after this second-stage screening for the following reasons: did not meet aforementioned criteria for PTSD (n = 12), did not meet RDC criteria for insomnia (n = 1), met criteria for alcohol or substance abuse or dependence in the past year (n = 4), met criteria for bipolar disorder (n = 2), met criteria for psychotic disorder (n = 1), had unstable prescription medication use (n = 3); had circadian day-night reversal (n = 1), had diagnosis of sleep apnea (n = 1), experienced severe head trauma (n = 1), did not have enough time to commit to the study (n = 4), and declined to participate (n = 5).

Assessment Measures
Current PTSD was assessed with the CAPS. The CAPS measures frequency and intensity of PTSD-related symptoms. Possible scores range from 0 to 136. The CAPS has excellent test-retest reliability (r = 0.92-0.99) and internal consistency (alpha = 0.80-0.90). Additionally, the CAPS item B2, “recurrent distressing dreams”, has face validity for assessment of trauma nightmares.

Diagnoses other than PTSD were assessed with the SCID. The SCID is a semistructured interview designed to assess DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for Axis I disorders. The SCID has been shown to have good reliability. Prescreening
========================================
Completed telephone pre-screening(n = 321)

Excluded (n = 241)
Not meeting inclusion criteria (n = 211)
No longer interested in study (n = 30)

Enrollment
========================================
Assessed for eligibility (n = 80)

Excluded (n = 35)
Not meeting inclusion criteria (n = 26)
Declined participation (n = 9)

Randomized (n = 45)

Allocated to CBT-I (n = 29)
Allocation
Allocated to waitlist control (n = 16)
Received allocated intervention (n = 27)
Completed waitlist condition (n = 15)
Did not complete intervention due to
New psychiatric medications (n = 1)
Declined due to work stress (n = 1)

Lost to follow-up due to
Declined participation (n = 2)
Inability to reach (n = 2)

Analyzed
Intent to treat (n = 29)
Completers (n = 27)
Follow-up completers (n = 23)

Intent to treat (n = 16)
Completers (n = 15)

Figure 1—Flow of participants through the trial. CBT-I, cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia.

Duke Structured Interview for Sleep Disorders
========================================
Research diagnostic criteria for insomnia were assessed using a portion of the DSISD. The DSISD is a semistructured interview that assesses research diagnostic criteria for sleep disorders. The DSISD has been shown to have good reliability and validity. All diagnoses were made by trained clinical interviewers who calibrated their assessments at weekly case consensus meetings, supervised by an experienced PhD-level clinical psychologist.

Sleep Diary
========================================
Participants recorded their sleep throughout the study using the sleep diary. The sleep diary was used by the study therapists on a weekly basis to monitor progress and was also an outcome measure. The sleep diary followed the standard recommendations for sleep research. Questions included in the diary allowed for the assessment of sleep onset latency (SOL), wake after sleep onset (WASO), total sleep time (TST), sleep efficiency (SE), and energy level. The sleep diary has been shown to be a reliable estimate and is considered the gold standard subjective measure of sleep.

Polysomnography
========================================
Polysomnography recordings were obtained with ambulatory polysomnography using ambulatory recorders (Trackit; Lifelines Ltd., Stockbridge, United Kingdom). These recorders filter and amplify the raw electroencephalogram (EEG) signals, then digitize the signals at 256 HZ and record to a removable hard disk in the EDF file format. The Trackit and associated recording software contain an internal calibration routine to insure that the values recorded in the EDF files truly represent the EEG amplitude. The parameters recorded included an EEG at leads C3, C4, O1, and O2, left and right. electrooculograms (EOG), submental electromyogram (EMG), bilateral anterior tibialis EMGs, and electrocardiogram (EKG) in accordance with standardized guidelines. Electrode impedances were < 5 kohm at the start of the recording. The EEG and EOG leads were referenced to linked mastoids, A1 and A2. Participants were screened for periodic limb movements (using the bilateral anterior tibialis EMG measurements) as well as obstructive sleep apnea, which involved measuring reductions in oronasal airflow with a thermistor, pulse oximetry for detection of oxygen desaturation events, and two channels of respiratory effort using strain gauges to measure chest and abdominal movement during breathing. No participants had an apnea/hypopnea index of 10 or greater (mean = 1.88, standard deviation [SD] = 2.34, range 0.0-7.20). Digitized polysomnography data were imported in TWin software (Grass Technologies, Middleton, WI) for visual scoring, and the data were scored in 30-sec epochs using standard scoring criteria by an experienced registered polysomnography technician who was unaware of participant group and time point. The results were used to generate the following polysomnography indices used in the analyses: WASO, TST, and sleep maintenance (SM) percentage [100 × TST/(TIB-sleep onset)]. We note that SOL was omitted; the polysomnography technician was not in the participants’ homes at the time of lights out in order to denote this event for accurate calculation of SOL. Correspondingly, SM rather than SE was used in order to eliminate SOL from the equation. Two nights of recording were obtained at baseline and two consecutive nights after 8 w. In both cases, data were analyzed only from the second night in order to avoid the first-night effect.

### Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index-Addendum
The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index-Addendum (PSQI-A) assesses disruptive nocturnal behaviors related to PTSD, such as sleep disturbances related to hot flashes, nightmares, and episodes of terror during sleep. The total score ranges from 0 (normal) to 21 (severe). The PSQI-A has demonstrated good internal consistency and convergent validity.

### PTSD Checklist
The 17-item PTSD checklist (PCL) is a validated self-report scale for assessing PTSD symptoms. Items correspond to the DSM-IV symptoms of PTSD. Scores range from 17 to 85, with higher scores indicating more severe PTSD symptoms.

### Beck Depression Inventory
The Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) is a widely-used 21-item measure assessing the subjective intensity of depression symptoms in the past week, with established validity and reliability. The total score ranges from 0-63, with a higher score indicative of more depression symptoms. This measure was included because of the frequent co-occurrence of depression symptoms with both PTSD and insomnia.

### Work and Social Adjustment Scale
The Work and Social Adjustment Scale (WSAS) is a five-item measure that assesses functioning in work, home management, social leisure activities, private leisure activities, and relationships with others. Each item is rated on a scale of 0 to 8, with higher scores reflecting greater impairment attributable to insomnia. The WSAS has demonstrated good internal consistency and test-retest correlation.

### Insomnia Severity Index
The ISI is a seven-item measure of perceived insomnia severity. The ISI assesses sleep difficulties and distress and impairment related to the sleep disturbance. Total scores range from 0-28, with a higher score indicative of greater insomnia severity. The ISI has excellent internal consistency (Cronbach α = 0.74) and temporal stability (r = 0.80), has been validated with both sleep diary and polysomnography, and is sensitive to clinical treatment response. Scoring guidelines consist of: score of 0-7 (no clinical insomnia), 8-14 (subthreshold insomnia), 15-21 (insomnia of moderate severity), and 22-28 (severe insomnia). Remitters are defined as those with a final score below 8.

### Actigraphy
Participants had their sleep-wake schedule monitored throughout the study with wrist actigraphy (Micro Motion-logger; Ambulatory Monitoring, Inc., Ardsley, NY). Actigraphy is an important adjunctive measure in the diagnosis and treatment of insomnia that can improve the reliability of self-report estimates of sleep. Actigraphy was used by the study therapists on a weekly basis to ensure that participants’ self-report was generally accurate (i.e., actigraphy served as a measure of participant accountability). If there was great discrepancy between sleep diary and actigraphy measures, therapists could inquire about the difference, but actigraphy data did not inform interventions or sleep restriction titration. Actigraphy also served as a secondary outcome measure. Actigraphs were initialized and downloaded with the ActMe program (Ambulatory Monitoring, Inc., Ardsley, NY) using the PIM/ZCM/TAT sampling mode in 1-min epochs. The PIM UCSD algorithm was used in ActionW Version 2.7 (Ambulatory Monitoring, Inc.) software to estimate sleep parameters including WASO, SM, and TST. SOL was not included (see rationale in polysomnography description in previous paragraphs).

### Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index
The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) is a widely-used 19-item broad measure of sleep quality and disturbances over the past month. Scores range from 0-21, with higher scores indicating worse sleep quality. The PSQI has been validated in both healthy and psychiatric patients and has strong psychometric properties.

### Epworth Sleepiness Scale
The Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) is an eight-item measure of daytime sleepiness. It assesses the likelihood of falling asleep in common daily situations, with higher scores indicating greater sleepiness. The ESS is a validated measure with high specificity and sensitivity.

### Treatment Conditions
#### Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia
CBT-I was administered, as is described in detail elsewhere, at the San Francisco VA Medical Center. CBT-I is a highly effective treatment for insomnia. structured intervention with core behavioral components of randomization of two-thirds of participants to the treatment group and one-third to the waitlist control group, and a consequent recruitment stop rule at n = 45. Primary outcomes included sleep diary, polysomnography, subjective sleep quality, nightmares, nonsleep PTSD symptoms, depression symptoms, and psychosocial functioning. The secondary outcome was actigraphy. All tests were planned and used two-tailed tests of significance, with P < 0.05 values indicating statistical significance. In measures with multiple outcomes (i.e., diary, polysomnography, and actigraphy), a P-value of 0.05/n of comparisons was applied to control for the family-wise error rate.

For measures collected daily (i.e., sleep diary and actigraphy) we used linear mixed models in order to treat time as a continuous variable and to include all available data regardless of sporadic missing daily observations. These models included random intercepts for subjects and fixed effects for treatment condition, time, and treatment condition by time interaction. Repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was carried out on measures collected at three time points (baseline, midtreatment, and posttreatment) in both conditions. Analysis of covariance, controlling for baseline score, was conducted to assess posttreatment group differences on measures collected at baseline and posttreatment (i.e., polysomnography, CAPS). Paired t-tests were used to compare baseline data to 6-mo follow-up data in the CBT-I group.

RESULTS
Participants included 45 individuals with chronic PTSD and chronic insomnia of whom 29 were randomly assigned to receive CBT-I and 16 to waitlist control. Demographic data for the two groups is presented in Table 1. Participants included 31 women and 14 men between 22 and 59 y old (mean age 37.2 y). Participants were primarily white and most were single, with a mean (SD) education duration of 16.2 (2.78) y. There were more veterans in the waitlist group (n = 6) compared to the control group (n = 3). No other significant differences were seen on any of the demographic variables. The mean (SD) PTSD duration was 18.48 (2.05) y. Forty percent of participants were taking a stable dose of antidepressant medication throughout the study. Twenty percent of participants had comorbid depression, and 51% had another psychiatric comorbidity. The mean (SD) number of comorbidities was 1.09 (0.19).

Waitlist Control
The monitor-only waitlist control condition consisted of continuous monitoring of sleep using diary and actigraphy in addition to data collection at baseline, after 4 w, and after 8 w as described previously under Study Design. Participants received weekly telephone or email check-ins from the study coordinator and were offered CBT-I following their completion of the research protocol.

Statistical Analysis
Analysis was carried out using SPSS statistical software Version 19 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY). The sample size was determined using a power analysis with 80% power to detect a medium effect size in diary-measured outcomes at P = 0.05. These criteria yielded a proposed sample size of 45, with

SLEEP, Vol. 37, No. 2, 2014
Treatment Attrition and Adherence
Three participants did not complete the treatment or waitlist period (two in CBT-I, of whom n = 1 dropped out after session two and n = 1 after session 3, and one in waitlist control, with reasons cited as work stress, n = 1; psychiatric crisis/new psychiatric medications, n = 1; and family emergency, n = 1). See Figure 1. We note that the participant in psychiatric crisis chose to complete five additional sessions of CBT-I but data were not collected due to the introduction by the participant’s psychiatrist of several new medications. The participants who did not complete the treatment or waitlist period did not differ on demographic variables including age, sex, years of education, race, marital status, or veteran status compared to completers. Four additional participants did not complete 6-mo follow-up (unable to reach, n = 2; declined, n = 2). They did not Table 1—Sociodemographic and clinical characteristics of participants

| Characteristic                                                  | CBT-I (n = 29)             | Waitlist (n = 16)  | Test statistic  | All participants |
|---------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------|-----------------|------------------|
| Age, mean (SD), y                                             | 37.1 (10.4)                | 37.3(11.0)         | t(43) = -0.05   | 37.2 (10.5)      |
| Sex, no. (%)                                                  |                            |                    | χ2 (1) = 1.85    |                  |
| Male                                                          | 7 (24.1)                   | 7 (43.8)           |                 | 14 (31.1)        |
| Female                                                        | 22 (75.9)                  | 9 (56.3)           |                 | 31 (68.9)        |
| Education duration, mean (SD), y                              | 16.4 (3.1)                 | 15.9 (2.1)         | t(43) = 0.52    | 16.2 (2.8)       |
| Race, no. (%)                                                 |                            |                    | χ2 (3) = 1.21    |                  |
| African American                                              | 5 (17.2)                   | 1 (6.3)            |                 | 6 (13.3)         |
| Asian American                                                | 3 (10.3)                   | 2 (12.5)           |                 | 5 (11.1)         |
| Caucasian                                                    | 20 (69.0)                  | 12 (75.0)          |                 | 32 (71.1)        |
| Other                                                         | 1 (3.4)                    | 1 (6.3)            |                 | 2 (4.4)          |
| Marital status, no. (%)                                       |                            |                    | χ2 (3) = 2.81    |                  |
| Single                                                       | 20 (69.0)                  | 10 (62.5)          |                 | 30 (66.6)        |
| Married/partnered                                             | 6 (20.7)                   | 2 (12.5)           |                 | 8 (17.8)         |
| Divorced                                                      | 3 (10.3)                   | 3 (18.8)           |                 | 6 (13.3)         |
| Separated                                                     | 0 (0.0)                    | 1 (6.3)            |                 | 1 (2.2)          |
| Veterans, no. (%)                                            | 3 (10.3)                   | 6 (37.5)           | χ2 (1) = 4.75    | 9 (20.0)         |
| PTSD duration, mean (SD), y                                   | 20.4 (13.6)                | 15.0 (13.8)        | t(43) = 0.21    | 18.5 (2.1)       |
| Current depression, no. (%)                                   | 5 (17.2)                   | 4 (25.0)           | χ2 (1) = 0.39    | 9 (20.0)         |
| Other psychiatric comorbidity, no. (%)                       | 13 (44.8)                  | 10 (62.5)          | χ2 (1) = 1.29    | 23 (51.1)        |
| Total number of comorbidities                                 | 0.9 (1.3)                  | 1.4 (1.3)          | t(43) = -1.38    | 1.1 (0.2)        |
| Psychotropic medication use, no. (%)                          | 11 (37.9)                  | 7 (43.8)           | χ2 (1) = 0.15    | 18 (40.0)        |

SD, standard deviation; CBT-I, cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia; PTSD, posttraumatic stress disorder.

Digital audio recordings of therapist sessions were assessed for treatment fidelity by DP, a PhD-level licensed clinical psychologist with 25 y of experience in behavioral sleep medicine and a coauthor of the published treatment manual used in this trial. Therapists received high ratings across the constructs assessed (therapist delivery of the individual treatment components, knowledge, attentiveness to the participants, skillfulness, and adherence to the protocol). Mean rating of overall delivery of the therapy components on a 0-10 scale was 9.65 (SD = 0.06, range 7-10), indicating excellent delivery of CBT-I. Therapists were also rated on whether they conducted trauma exposure and/or trauma event related cognitive therapy, on a scale from 0 (‘very true’) to 10 (‘not true’). Mean ratings were 9.99 (SD = 0.01, range 9-10), indicating that therapists did not stray into trauma content during the therapy.

Primary Outcomes: Sleep Diary

CBT-I was superior to the waitlist condition in our sleep diary outcomes (Table 2). Statistical analyses showed significant condition × time interactions. CBT-I produced significantly greater baseline to posttreatment improvements measured SOL (F(1,2697) = 20.59, P < 0.001, d = 0.82), WASO (F(1,2695) = 22.75, P < 0.001, d = 0.93), SE (F(1,2710) = 35.89, P < 0.001, d = 1.06), TST (F(1,2711) = 5.25, P = 0.022, d = 0.30), and energy level (F(1,2606) = 68.15, P < 0.001, d = 0.67) compared to the waitlist control group. When a P-value cutoff of P = 0.01 was applied to control for the family-wise error rate, all outcomes remained significant except for TST.

Participants in CBT-I also showed significant reductions in mean diary-measured SOL (t(22) = 6.31, P < 0.001, d = 1.31) and WASO (t(22) = 4.96, P < 0.001, d = 1.03), and increases in SE (t(22) = -7.10, P < 0.001, d = -1.48), TST (t(22) = -3.63, P = 0.001, d = -0.76) and energy (t(22) = -2.19, P = 0.039, d = -0.46) from the baseline assessment to the 6-mo follow-up. When a P-value cutoff of P = 0.01 was applied to control for the family-wise error rate, all outcomes remained significant except for energy.

Polysomnography

A univariate analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was conducted on polysomnography-measured TST with condition (CBT-I, waitlist control) as the between-subjects variable, with baseline polysomnography-measured TST as the covariate (Table 2). There was a significant effect of condition (F(1,32) = 5.48, P = 0.008, ηρ² = 0.15), with the CBT-I group demonstrating more TST at posttreatment. Univariate ANCOVAs on polysomnography-measured WASO and SM did not yield effects of condition. When a P-value cutoff of P = 0.02 was applied to control for the family-wise error rate, TST remained significant.

Subjective Sleep Quality

Insomnia Severity Index

CBT-I was superior to the waitlist condition in our primary self-report sleep outcomes (Table 3). A repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted on the ISI total score with condition (CBT-I, waitlist control) as the between-subject variable and time (baseline, midtreatment, posttreatment) as the within-subject variable. There was a significant condition × time interaction. Table 2—Means and standard errors for sleep parameters from sleep diaries, polysomnography, and actigraphy

| Sleep diary data | Initial treatment | Follow-up | Baseline | Midtreatment | Posttreatment | 6-mo |
|------------------|------------------|-----------|----------|--------------|----------------|------|
| SOL, min         |                  |           |          |              |                |      |
| CBT-I            | 49.24 (6.13)     |           | 20.74 (3.68) | 14.27 (2.27) | 12.52 (1.95)   |      |
| Waitlist control  | 63.11 (17.31)    |           | 47.92 (12.11) | 44.31 (11.72) |                |      |
| WASO, min        |                  |           |          |              |                |      |
| CBT-I            | 56.35 (7.81)     |           | 16.80 (2.61) | 13.821 (2.03) | 18.71 (4.52)   |      |
| Waitlist control  | 71.85 (11.96)    |           | 45.85 (8.88) | 47.25 (11.45) |                |      |
| SE, %            |                  |           |          |              |                |      |
| CBT-I            | 78.68 (2.15)     |           | 91.12 (1.42) | 93.72 (0.93) | 93.72 (1.30)   |      |
| Waitlist control  | 73.47 (3.45)     |           | 79.89 (2.80) | 81.77 (2.47) |                |      |
| TST, h           |                  |           |          |              |                |      |
| CBT-I            | 6.56 (0.23)      |           | 6.59 (0.29) | 7.29 (0.24)  | 7.70 (0.26)    |      |
| Waitlist control  | 6.11 (0.26)      |           | 6.49 (0.26) | 6.57 (0.19)  |                |      |
| Energy, from 0-100 |                  |           |          |              |                |      |
| CBT-I            | 41.94 (2.60)     |           | 40.05 (4.22) | 55.83 (4.24) | 53.89 (4.61)   |      |
| Waitlist control  | 48.89 (4.14)     |           | 46.17 (4.75) | 42.73 (5.17) |                |      |

Polysomnography data

| WASO, min        |                  |           |          |              |                |      |
|------------------|------------------|-----------|----------|--------------|----------------|------|
| CBT-I            | 43.75 (7.12)     |           |          |              | 39.25 (7.73)   |      |
| Waitlist control  | 39.34 (7.48)     |           |          |              | 57.63 (18.28)  |      |
| SM, %            |                  |           |          |              |                |      |
| CBT-I            | 89.02 (2.26)     |           |          |              | 91.35 (1.91)   |      |
| Waitlist control  | 91.45 (1.56)     |           |          |              | 88.14 (3.59)   |      |
| TST, min         |                  |           |          |              |                |      |
| CBT-I            | 6.35 (0.41)      |           |          |              | 6.94 (0.28)    |      |
| Waitlist control  | 6.77 (0.35)      |           |          |              | 6.38 (0.33)    |      |

Actigraphy data

| WASO, min        |                  |           |          |              |                |      |
|------------------|------------------|-----------|----------|--------------|----------------|------|
| CBT-I            | 124.67 (14.80)   | 107.66 (14.52) | 104.88 (14.91) | 112.25 (17.28) |      |
| Waitlist control  | 129.40 (18.61)   | 132.35 (18.45) | 118.84 (18.25) |                |      |
| SM, %            |                  |           |          |              |                |      |
| CBT-I            | 74.08 (3.02)     | 75.83 (2.93)  | 76.93 (3.11) | 77.50 (3.04)   |      |
| Waitlist control  | 71.55 (3.97)     | 71.56 (3.89)  | 73.74 (4.31) |                |      |
| TST, min         |                  |           |          |              |                |      |
| CBT-I            | 5.85 (0.31)      | 5.52 (0.29)   | 5.84 (0.32)  | 6.29 (0.30)    |      |
| Waitlist control  | 5.57 (0.43)      | 5.70 (0.50)   | 5.79 (0.52)  |                |      |

SOL, sleep onset latency; CBT-I, cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia; WASO, wake after sleep onset; SE, sleep efficiency; TST, total sleep time; SM, sleep maintenance.

interaction, (F(2,80) = 19.75, P < 0.001, ηρ² = 0.33). Follow-up tests yielded no significant group difference at baseline but significantly lower scores in the CBT-I participants at midtreatment (t(40) = -2.27, P = 0.029) and posttreatment (t(40) = -6.82, P < 0.001). Using the ISI cutoff score of 7 or less indicating no clinically significant insomnia, 41% of participants in CBT-I were classified as remitters whereas 0% of participants in the waitlist control group were classified as remitters. CBT-I participants also showed significant reductions in the ISI score from baseline to the 6-mo follow-up (t(22) = 7.62, P < 0.001, d = 1.59). between-subjects variable and time (baseline, midtreatment, posttreatment) as the within-subject variable. There was a significant condition × time interaction for PSQI, (F(2,80) = 22.13, P < 0.001, ηρ² = 0.36; Figure 2). Follow-up tests yielded no significant group difference at baseline, but significantly lower scores in the CBT-I group at midtreatment (t(40) = -2.13, P = 0.039) and posttreatment (t(40) = -7.62, P < 0.001). CBT-I participants also showed significant reductions in the PSQI score from the baseline assessments to the 6-mo follow-up (t(22) = 6.86, P < 0.001, d = 1.43).

The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index

A repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted on the PSQI score with condition (CBT-I, waitlist control) as the SLEEP, Vol. 37, No. 2, 2014 334 CBT-I in PTSD—Talbot et al Table 3—Means and standard errors for self-reported sleep measures, nonsleep posttraumatic stress disorders symptoms, nightmares, and depression symptoms

| Sleep measures                | Initial treatment | Follow-up         |
|-------------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
|                               | Baseline          | Midtreatment      | Posttreatment     | 6-mo             |
| ISI                           |                   |                   |                   |                  |
| CBT-I                        | 18.58 (0.59)      | 14.07 (0.80)      | 8.00 (0.76)       | 8.17 (1.13)      |
| Waitlist control              | 17.94 (0.60)      | 17.00 (0.97)      | 16.60 (0.99)      |                  |
| ESS                           |                   |                   |                   |                  |
| CBT-I                        | 7.69 (0.81)       | 10.50 (1.09)      | 6.13 (0.95)       | 5.04 (0.98)      |
| Waitlist control              | 8.44 (0.89)       | 9.27 (1.08)       | 10.14 (1.11)      |                  |
| Nonsleep PTSD symptoms        |                   |                   |                   |                  |
| PCL                           |                   |                   |                   |                  |
| CBT-I                        | 43.69 (1.85)      | 37.19 (1.76)      | 32.96 (1.65)      | 32.91 (2.05)     |
| Waitlist control              | 46.19 (2.40)      | 42.60 (2.88)      | 39.43 (2.87)      |                  |
| Nightmares                    |                   |                   |                   |                  |
| CAPS Distressing Dreams Item   |                   |                   |                   |                  |
| CBT-I                        | 4.38 (0.47)       |                   | 1.48 (0.43)       | 2.23 (0.48)      |
| Waitlist control              | 4.25 (0.48)       |                   | 1.07 (0.48)       |                  |
| Depression symptoms           |                   |                   |                   |                  |
| BDIPSQI Score                |                   |                   |                   |                  |
| CBT-I                        | 18.55 (1.43)      | 14.56 (1.19)      | 13.15 (1.68)      | 11.82 (1.37)     |
| Waitlist control              | 21.75 (2.14)      | 19.00 (2.04)      | 19.20 (1.80)      |                  |

ISI, Insomnia Severity Index; CBT-I, cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia; ESS, Epworth Sleepiness Scale; PTSD, posttraumatic stress disorder; PCL, PTSD checklist; CAPS, Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale; BDI, Beck Depression Inventory. Lower scores indicate less severe clinical symptoms.

variable and time (baseline, midtreatment, posttreatment) as the within-subject variable. There was a significant condition × time interaction. Follow-up tests yielded no significant group difference at baseline or midtreatment but significantly lower scores in the CBT-I participants at posttreatment. CBT-I participants also showed significant reductions in the ESS score from the baseline assessments to the 6-mo follow-up.

Nightmares
Disruptive nocturnal behaviors were assessed using the PSQI-A and the CAPS distressing dreams item. A repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted on the PSQI-A score with condition (CBT-I, waitlist control) as the between-subjects variable and time (baseline, midtreatment, posttreatment) as the within-subject variable. There was a significant condition × time interaction. Follow-up tests yielded a significant difference at baseline, with the CBT-I participants starting with higher PSQI-A scores, but no difference at post-treatment. CBT-I participants also showed significant reductions in the PSQI-A score from the baseline assessments to the 6-mo follow-up.

A univariate ANCOVA was conducted on the posttreatment CAPS distressing dreams item (sum of frequency and intensity of item B2) with condition (CBT-I, waitlist control) as the between-subjects variable, with baseline CAPS dreams item score as the covariate. There was no effect of condition. CBT-I participants showed significant reductions in this item score from the baseline assessments to the 6-mo follow-up.

Nonsleep PTSD Symptoms
CBT-I was not superior to the waitlist control condition in distressing either the rater or self-report measure of symptom severity. | PSQI-A Score | 70 | 30 | CAPS Score |
|--------------|----|----|------------|
|              | 60 |    | CBT-I (excludes sleep symptoms) | 28 |
|              | 50 |    | Waitlist | 26 |
|              | 40 |    |            | 24 |
|              | 30 |    |            | 22 |
|              | 20 |    |            | 20 |
|              | 10 |    |            | 18 |
|              |  0 | Baseline | Posttreatment | Baseline | Midtreatment | Posttreatment |

Figure 3—Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS) scores. CBT-I, cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia. Condition × time interaction, P < 0.001.

| WSAS Score | 16 | 15 | 14 | 13 | 12 | 11 | 10 |
|------------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
|            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |

Figure 5—Work and Social Adjustment Scale (WSAS) (impairment) scores. CBT-I, cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia. Condition × time interaction, P = 0.007.

To assess overall PTSD symptoms without the influence of sleep symptoms, CAPS total score was computed without the two sleep symptoms (B2: distressing dreams and D1: difficulty falling or staying asleep). A univariate ANCOVA was conducted on the total CAPS score (excluding sleep symptoms) with condition (CBT-I, waitlist control) as the between-subjects variable, with baseline total CAPS score (excluding sleep symptoms) as the covariate. There was no effect of condition. CBT-I participants showed significant reductions in total CAPS score (excluding sleep symptoms) from the baseline assessments to the six-month follow-up.

Next, overall PTSD symptoms without the influence of sleep symptoms were examined using the PCL (excluding the sleep-related items, #2 and #13). A repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted on the PCL score (excluding sleep items) with condition (CBT-I, waitlist control) as the between-subjects variable and time (baseline, midtreatment, posttreatment) as the within-subject variable. There was a condition × time interaction. Follow-up tests yielded no group differences at baseline or midtreatment, but the CBT-I participants had significantly lower scores at posttreatment. CBT-I participants also showed significant reductions from baseline assessments to the six-month follow-up. the baseline assessments to the 6-mo follow-up (t(22) = 4.90, P < 0.001, d = 1.02)

## Secondary Outcome: Actigraphy
Statistical analyses showed no significant treatment × time interactions or main effects of condition or time. Participants in CBT-I did not show any differences in mean WASO, SM, or TST from baseline to 6-mo follow-up.

## DISCUSSION
We examined the efficacy of CBT-I in individuals with PTSD compared to a waitlist control group. In support of our hypothesis, we observed that CBT-I improved sleep outcomes across sleep diary and polysomnography. According to the sleep diary, individuals randomized to CBT-I demonstrated reduced SOL and WASO and increased SE, TST, and energy compared to waitlist control participants, though we note that TST did not remain significant after applying a strict alpha to control for the family-wise error rate. These effects remained robust at 6-mo follow-up (e.g., TST continued to increase, from 7.3 to 7.7 h). These findings are noteworthy given that insomnia is currently defined based on self-report and some research suggests that sleep diaries more accurately distinguish individuals insomnia from good sleepers compared to actigraphy.

As measured by polysomnography, the CBT-I group demonstrated more TST at posttreatment compared to the waitlist control group but no difference in WASO or SM. The finding that this objective estimate indicated a mean TST increase of 30 min by the end of the 8-w treatment is compelling, particularly given that one of the core behavioral components of CBT-I (sleep restriction) often results in a temporarily reduced TST that gradually returns to baseline levels or higher after 6 mo. Nonetheless, we are cautious in our enthusiasm given that the data are based on 1 night of measurement (subsequent to acclimation nights) at baseline and posttreatment.

CBT-I participants also reported significant improvements in subjective sleep quality at posttreatment, which remained at 6 mo, based on the three self-report measures: ISI, ESS, and PSQI. These indicate that CBT-I participants experienced improved functioning across a broad array of sleep related constructs including sleep disturbance, daytime sleepiness, and overall sleep quality. In particular, the CBT-I participants had a remission rate (based on an ISI score of less than 7, indicating no clinically significant insomnia) of 41%. We note that this rate is comparable with the 39% remission rate demonstrated in a recent trial of 6-w CBT-I in a sample of adults with persistent insomnia (of which 15% had a comorbid psychiatric disorder). The encouraging remission rates in the current study suggest that CBT-I in PTSD may be as clinically useful as CBT-I delivered to individuals without psychiatric comorbidities.

We included actigraphy as a secondary sleep outcome. In contrast to diary and polysomnography, based on actigraphy the CBT-I group did not show differences in sleep. However, we note that the means were in the predicted direction and that a paired t-test on the means in the CBT-I group indicated a significant decrease in WASO from baseline to posttreatment (while the same comparison was not significant in the waitlist condition). In addition, mean TST increased by more than 30 min from posttreatment to 6-mo follow-up.

Hence, CBT-I participants demonstrated improvements across numerous measures of sleep, though there were some variations across diary, polysomnography, and actigraphy. These differences align with previous research that has frequently demonstrated some discrepancies between objective and subjective measures of sleep, particularly in individuals with psychiatric disorders including PTSD. Numerous possibilities may explain these differences, such as sleep hyper-arousal. As such, it is considered the gold standard to collect data from both objective and subjective sources and regard both as important.

Individuals in the waitlist control group showed smaller improvements in sleep than did the CBT-I group and only demonstrated these improvements based on the sleep diary. A set of post hoc paired t-tests on mean values of diary variables in the waitlist group indicated that individuals reported significantly increased TST and SE and decreased WASO and marginally decreased SOL after the 8-w monitor-only period compared to baseline. It is possible that individuals in the waitlist condition reported improvements in these sleep measures as a result of (1) having self-monitored their sleep on a daily basis for 8 w, (2) feeling their sleep was being “observed” via actigraphy, and (3) anticipating the upcoming sleep treatment. The first two possibilities indicate that daily monitoring of sleep could serve as an intervention for insomnia.

The overall finding that CBT-I appears to be a useful treatment that will likely improve the highly prevalent sleep disturbance that occurs in PTSD is noteworthy for several reasons. First, the data answer the theoretical question pertaining to whether the potential unique features of sleep disturbance inherent to PTSD would render individuals unresponsive to CBT-I. For example, nightmares are frequent in PTSD and they differentiate the sleep disturbance in PTSD from the sleep disturbance of other disorders. In addition, it is common for the trauma of PTSD to have occurred at night or in the bedroom, potentially leading individuals to feel unsafe in the sleeping environment. We emphasize that in our trial therapists intentionally did not address any beliefs about the safety of the bed/bedroom in order to avoid introducing elements of CBT for PTSD. Despite these unique aspects of sleep in PTSD, CBT-I was efficacious. These findings augment the theoretical foundation of CBT-I, which presumes a conditioned association between being in bed and feeling anxiously aroused. The findings are in accord with accruing research demonstrating the success of CBT-I in the context of comorbid disorders.

Second, CBT-I as a nonpharmacologic treatment may be particularly beneficial to individuals with PTSD given that many individuals are already taking numerous medications and as such CBT-I would not result in further polypharmacy or drug interaction effects. At the same time, data suggest that CBT-I is efficacious regardless of whether individuals are taking medications so it could be applied even when individuals are unable or unwilling to reduce hypnotic medications.

Third, the CBT-I in our trial emphasized the behavioral components of stimulus control and sleep restriction. Previous research suggests that behaviorally focused versions of CBT-I can be delivered effectively by providers without a background in sleep medicine. Administration has begun to implement training of a broad spectrum of clinicians in CBT-I, and as such many providers could use CBT-I to treat the large number of veterans with PTSD.

Fourth, many individuals with PTSD do not seek treatment due to such issues as stigma and avoidance of discussing the trauma. Treatment of insomnia with CBT-I would likely carry less stigma. In addition, CBT-I could serve as an introduction to further treatment (e.g., exposure-based) or potentially even improve some of the nightmare and nonsleep PTSD symptoms, as we discuss in the following paragraphs.

We examined whether CBT-I would improve nightmares, nonsleep PTSD symptoms, depression symptoms, and psychosocial functioning. In regard to nightmares, we observed that active treatment was superior to the waitlist control condition for disruptive nocturnal behaviors as indicated by changes in the PSQI-A scores. The PSQI-A is a broad measure of PTSD-related sleep disturbances, including nightmare items. However, based on the CAPS distressing dreams item, both the CBT-I and waitlist control groups improved posttreatment. The CBT-I group’s improvement was durable as measured 6 mo later. Hence, the findings in regard to nightmares are mixed overall. There is initial evidence that CBT-I may be beneficial for nightmares, but the waitlist control group’s substantial improvement on the specific nightmare item suggests it is difficult to draw unequivocal conclusions. Nonetheless, given the promising PSQI-A results, clinicians may consider offering a short course of CBT-I as an initial treatment for nightmares that co-occur with insomnia, particularly if there are concerns about the use of a nightmare-targeting medication or a nightmare protocol with some exposure elements.

We also examined whether CBT-I would improve nonsleep PTSD symptoms. Here, both the CBT-I and waitlist control groups showed a large improvement from baseline to post-treatment as evidenced by the CAPS (mean score decrease of 27.5 for the CBT-I group and 24.1 for the waitlist control group) and the PCL, again making it difficult to draw conclusions about the effect of the treatment on non-PTSD symptoms. It is not uncommon for participants in inactive or waitlist control treatments to demonstrate improvements in outcomes such as PTSD symptoms. There are a number of possible explanations for the improvement in the waitlist control group. The waitlist control participants may have derived some relief from the anticipation of the CBT-I treatment they would be offered at the conclusion of the study. In addition, they may have experienced satisfaction from contributing to the development of a treatment for their symptoms. They may also have derived a sense of belonging or social support through the connection to the study, which included meeting with a clinical interviewer, visiting the laboratory at baseline, after 4 w and 8 w, and receiving weekly calls or emails from the study coordinator. Indeed, posttreatment feedback forms indicated a high degree of satisfaction with study staff. Moreover, as discussed earlier, participants in the waitlist control group reported significantly improved diary-measured sleep at the end of the 8 w, raising the possibility that monitoring via sleep diary and actigraphy may be an active treatment for sleep disturbance (though not as potent as CBT-I). If this is the case, the sleep gains may have negated potential differences in nonsleep PTSD outcomes between the CBT-I and waitlist control groups.

Overall, further research is necessary to address whether CBT-I improves nonsleep PTSD symptoms. Future research could include a waitlist control group without self-monitoring, though this design presents data limitations. A future trial could instead include an attention-control condition, though this design raises some of the same nonspecific factors as a waitlist control condition as well as potential issues pertaining to the ethics of disingenuous treatment and treatment credibility. Notwithstanding, a combination of additional research, including varying methods and larger trials, will inform clinicians whether to begin treatment of PTSD with CBT-I in order to address both sleep disturbance and other symptoms, or whether to use CBT-I concurrently with or subsequent to PTSD-focused treatment in order to address the sleep disturbance that commonly remains following first-line PTSD treatment.

Our final questions pertained to whether CBT-I might improve depression symptoms, given the high comorbidity between PTSD and depression, as well as overall psychosocial functioning. In terms of depression symptoms, both groups improved by midtreatment, likely for the same reasons that PTSD symptoms improved in both groups, but only the CBT-I group continued to demonstrate a decrease in scores at posttreatment. These data tentatively suggest that CBT-I may ameliorate depression symptoms that co-occur with PTSD, in accord with previous CBT-I research demonstrating benefits for depression.

In terms of overall psychosocial functioning, the CBT-I group demonstrated a significant drop in psychosocial impairment from baseline to posttreatment that continued to drop at the 6-mo follow-up, whereas the waitlist control group’s scores remained flat. This finding that treating sleep disturbance effectively addressed the overall impairment associated with PTSD has important clinical implications, given that individuals with PTSD frequently report difficulties in psychosocial functioning, such as difficulties with close relationships.

Strengths of the current study include the multimethod measurement of sleep, two-arm design, and longitudinal follow-up. Limitations include the small sample size and limited number of nights of polysomnography. In addition, the sample may not have been completely representative of the general PTSD population (e.g., considering participant requirements of current mental health treatment and no alcohol or substance abuse or dependence in the past year).

In summary, CBT-I was efficacious in the treatment of insomnia and disruptive nocturnal behaviors in PTSD, and the improvements in sleep were sustained. The initial evidence regarding CBT-I and nightmares is promising but further evaluation is needed. Most importantly, overall psychosocial functioning improved following CBT-I. Further research that includes larger sample sizes is needed to definitively determine whether nonsleep PTSD symptoms improve as a result of CBT-I. Combined, the results suggest that a comprehensive approach to treatment of PTSD should include behavioral sleep medicine. random effects and covariates, including pretreatment scores on the outcome variable

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to Maryann Lenoci, Sarah Roth, and Laura Straus for their logistical and technical support, and to Erin Madden for statistical advice

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
This was not an industry supported study. The authors have indicated no financial conflicts of interest. This project was supported by grants from the National Institute for Mental Health (TCN: 5R01MH073978-04, 5R34MH077667-03) and the Mental Illness Research and Education Clinical Center of the US Veterans Health Administration. Its contents are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH. This material is the result of work supported with resources and the use of facilities at the Veterans Administration Medical Center, San Francisco, CA

| Reference Number | Authors | Title | Journal | Year | Volume | Pages |
|------------------|---------|-------|---------|------|--------|-------|
| 1 | Roszell DK, McFall ME, Malas KL | Frequency of symptoms and concurrent psychiatric disorder in Vietnam veterans with chronic PTSD | Hosp Community Psychiatry | 1991 | 42 | 293-6 |
| 2 | Ohayon MM, Shapiro CM | Sleep disturbances and psychiatric disorders associated with posttraumatic stress disorder in the general population | Compr Psychiatry | 2000 | 41 | 469-78 |
| 3 | Roszell DK, McFall ME, Malas KL | Frequency of symptoms and concurrent psychiatric disorder in Vietnam veterans with chronic PTSD | Hosp Community Psychiatry | 1991 | 42 | 293-6 |
| 4 | Mellman TA, Kulick-Bell R, Ashlock LE, Nolan B | Sleep events among veterans with combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder | Am J Psychiatry | 1995 | 152 | 110-5 |
| 5 | Germain A, Buysse DJ, Shear MK, Fayyad R, Austin C | Clinical correlates of poor sleep quality in posttraumatic stress disorder | J Trauma Stress | 2004 | 17 | 474-84 |
| 6 | Mellman TA, Clark RE, Peacock WJ | Prescribing patterns for patients with posttraumatic stress disorder | Psychiatr Serv | 2003 | 54 | 1618-21 |
| 7 | Rosen CS, Chow HC, Finney JF, et al | VA practice patterns and practice guidelines for treating posttraumatic stress disorder | J Trauma Stress | 2004 | 17 | 213-22 |
| 8 | McLay RN, Klam WP, Volkert SL | Insomnia is the most commonly reported symptom and predicts other symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder in U.S. service members returning from military deployments | Mil Med | 2010 | 175 | 759-62 |
| 9 | Germain A, Buysse DJ, Nofzinger E | Sleep-specific mechanisms underlying posttraumatic stress disorder: integrative review and neurobiological hypotheses | Sleep Med Rev | 2008 | 12 | 185-95 |
| 10 | Ford DE, Kamerow DB | Epidemiologic study of sleep disturbances and psychiatric disorders. An opportunity for prevention? | JAMA | 1989 | 262 | 1479-84 |
| 11 | Breslau N, Roth T, Rosenthal L, Andreski P | Sleep disturbance and psychiatric disorders: a longitudinal epidemiological study of young adults | Biol Psychiatry | 1996 | 39 | 411-8 |
| 12 | Livingston G, Blizard B, Mann A | Does sleep disturbance predict depression in elderly people? A study in inner London | Br J Gen Pract | 1993 | 43 | 445-8 |
| 13 | Chang PP, Ford DE, Mead LA, Cooper-Patrick L, Klag MJ | Insomnia in young men and subsequent depression. The Johns Hopkins Precursors Study | Am J Epidemiol | 1997 | 146 | 105-14 |
| 14 | Mohr DC, Vedantham K, Neylan TC, Metzler TJ, Best SR, Marmar CR | The mediating effects of sleep in the relationship between traumatic stress and health symptoms in urban police officers | Psychosom Med | 2003 | 65 | 485-9 |
| 15 | Clum GA, Nishith P, Resick PA | Trauma-related sleep disturbance and self-reported physical health symptoms in treatment-seeking female rape victims | J Nerv Ment Dis | 2001 | 189 | 618-22 |
| 16 | Suka M, Yoshida K, Sugimori H | Persistent insomnia is a predictor of hypertension in Japanese male workers | J Occup Health | 2003 | 45 | 344-50 |
| 17 | Irwin M, Fortner M, Clark C, et al | Reduction of natural killer cell activity in primary insomnia and in major depression | Sleep Res | 1995 | 24 | 256 |
| 18 | DeViva JC, Zayfert C, Mellman TA | Factors associated with insomnia among civilians seeking treatment for PTSD: an exploratory study | Behav Sleep Med | 2004 | 2 | 162-76 |
| 19 | Neylan TC, Marmar CR, Metzler TJ, et al | Sleep disturbances in the Vietnam generation: Findings from a nationally representative sample of male Vietnam veterans | Am J Psychiatry | 1998 | 155 | 929-33 |
| 20 | Nishith P, Resick PA, Mueser KT | Sleep difficulties and alcohol use motives in female rape victims with posttraumatic stress disorder | J Trauma Stress | 2001 | 14 | 469-79 |
| 21 | Kuppermann M, Lubeck DP, Mazonson PD, et al | Sleep problems and their correlates in a working population | J Gen Intern Med | 1995 | 10 | 25-32 |
| 22 | Reimer MA, Flemons WW | Quality of life in sleep disorders | Sleep Med Rev | 2003 | 7 | 335-49 |
| 23 | Rosenthal LD, Meixner RM | Psychological status and levels of sleepiness-alertness among patients with insomnia | CNS Spectr | 2003 | 8 | 114-8 |
| 24 | Riedel BW, Lichstein KL | Strategies for evaluating adherence to sleep restriction treatment for insomnia | Behav Res Ther | 2001 | 39 | 201-12 |
| 25 | Moul DE, Nofzinger EA, Pilkonis PA, Houck PR, Miewald JM, Buysse DJ | Symptom reports in severe chronic insomnia | Sleep | 2002 | 25 | 553-63 |
| 26 | Ohayon MM, Caulet M, Philip P, Guilleminault C, Priest RG | How sleep and mental disorders are related to complaints of daytime sleepiness | Arch Intern Med | 1997 | 157 | 2645-52 |
| 27 | Belleville G, Guay S, Marchand A | Persistence of sleep disturbances following cognitive-behavior therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder | J Psychosom Res | 2011 | 70 | 318-27 |
| 28 | Zayfert C, DeViva JC | Residual insomnia following cognitive behavioral therapy for PTSD | J Traum Stress | 2004 | 17 | 69-73 |
| 29 | Friedman MJ | Future pharmacotherapy for post-traumatic stress disorder: prevention and treatment | Psychiatr Clin North Am | 2002 | 25 | 427-41 |
| 30 | Jacobs-Rebhun S, Schnurr PP, Friedman MJ, Peck R, Brophy M, Fuller D | Posttraumatic stress disorder and sleep difficulty | Am J Psychiatry | 2000 | 157 | 1525-6 |
| 31 | Oberndorfer S, Saletu-Zyhlarz G, Saletu B | Effects of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors on objective and subjective sleep quality | Neuropsychobiology | 2000 | 42 | 69-81 |
| 32 | Friedman MJ | Drug treatment for PTSD. Answers and questions | Ann NY Acad Sci | 1997 | 821 | 359-71 |
| 33 | Morin CM, Culbert JP, Schwartz SM | Nonpharmacological interventions for insomnia: a meta-analysis of treatment efficacy | Am J Psychiatry | 1994 | 151 | 1172-80 |
| 34 | Murtagh DR, Greenwood KM | Identifying effective psychological treatments for insomnia: a meta-analysis | J Consult Clin Psych | 1995 | 63 | 79-89 |
| 35 | Edinger JD, Wohlgemuth WK, Radtke RA, Marsh GR, Quillian RE | Cognitive behavioral therapy for treatment of chronic primary insomnia: A randomized controlled trial | JAMA | 2001 | 285 | 1856-64 |
| 36 | Morin CM, Vallieres A, Guay B, et al | Cognitive behavior therapy, singly and combined with medication, for persistent insomnia: a randomized controlled trial | JAMA | 2009 | 301 | 2005-15 |
| 37 | Chesson AL Jr, Anderson WM, Littner M, et al | Practice parameters for the nonpharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia. An American Academy of Sleep Medicine report | Sleep | 1999 | 22 | 1128-33 |
| 38 | Chesson A Jr, Hartse K, Anderson WM, et al | Practice parameters for the evaluation of chronic insomnia. An American Academy of Sleep Medicine report | Sleep | 2000 | 23 | 237-41 |
| 39 | Murtagh DR, Greenwood KM | Identifying effective psychological treatments for insomnia: a meta-analysis | J Consult Clin Psychol | 1995 | 63 | 79-89 |
| 40 | Morin CM, Hauri PJ, Espie CA, Spielman AJ, Buysse DJ, Bootzin RR | Nonpharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia. An American Academy of Sleep Medicine review | Sleep | 1999 | 22 | 1134-56 |
| 41 | Krystal AD, Walsh JK, Laska E, et al | Sustained efficacy of eszopiclone over 6 months of nightly treatment: results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study in adults with chronic insomnia | Sleep | 2003 | 26 | 793-9 |
| 42 | Perlis ML, Sharpe M, Smith MT, Greenblatt D, Giles D | Behavioral treatment of insomnia: treatment outcome and the relevance of medical and psychiatric morbidity | J Behav Med | 2001 | 24 | 281-96 | 43.  Dashevsky BA, Kramer M. Behavioral treatment of chronic insomnia in psychiatrically ill patients. J Clin Psychiatry 1998;59:693-9; quiz 700-1
44.  Lichstein KL, Wilson NM, Johnson CT. Psychological treatment of secondary insomnia. Psychol Aging 2000;15:232-40
45.  Morin CM, Bootzin RR, Buysse DJ, Edinger JD, Espie CA, Lichstein KL. Psychological and behavioral treatment of insomnia: An update of recent evidence (1998-2004). Sleep 2006;29:1396-406
46.  Morin CM, Kowatch RA, Wade JB. Behavioral management of sleep disturbances secondary to chronic pain. J Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry 1989;20:295-302
47.  Morin CM, Kowatch RA, O’Shanick G. Sleep restriction for the inpatient treatment of insomnia. Sleep 1990;13:183-6
48.  Currie SR, Clark S, Hodgins DC, El-Guebaly N. Randomized controlled trial of brief cognitive-behavioural interventions for insomnia in recovering alcoholics. Addiction 2004;99:1121-32
49.  Spielman AJ, Caruso LS, Glovinsky PB. A behavioral perspective on insomnia treatment. Psychiatr Clin North Am 1987;10:541-53
50.  DeViva JC, Zayfert C, Pigeon WR, Mellman TA. Treatment of residual insomnia after CBT for PTSD: Case studies. J Trauma Stress 2005;18:155-9
51.  Krakow B, Zadra A. Clinical management of chronic nightmares: Imagery rehearsal therapy. Behav Sleep Med 2006;4:45-70
52.  Schoenfeld FB, DeViva JC, Manber R. Treatment of sleep disturbances in posttraumatic stress disorder: A review. J Rehabil Res Dev 2012;49:729-52
53.  Ulmer CS, Edinger JD, Calhoun PS. A multi-component cognitive-behavioral intervention for sleep disturbance in veterans with PTSD: A pilot study. J Clin Sleep Med 2011;7:57-68
54.  Germain A, Richardson R, Moul DE, et al. Placebo-controlled comparison of prazosin and cognitive-behavioral treatments for sleep disturbances in US Military Veterans. J Psychosom Res 2012;72:89-96
55.  Manber R, Carney C, Edinger J, et al. Dissemination of CBTI to the non-sleep specialist: protocol development and training issues. J Clin Sleep Med 2012;8:209-18
56.  Buysse DJ, Germain A, Moul DE, et al. Efficacy of brief behavioral treatment for chronic insomnia in older adults. Arch Intern Med 2011;171:887-95
57.  Neylan TC. Time to dissseminate cognitive behavioral treatment of insomnia. Comment on “Efficacy of brief behavioral treatment for chronic insomnia in older adults”. Arch Intern Med 2011;171:895-6
58.  Krakow BJ, Melendrez DC, Johnston LG, et al. Sleep dynamic therapy for Cerro Grande fire evacuees with posttraumatic stress symptoms: A preliminary report. J Clin Psychiatry 2002;63:673-84
59.  Edinger JD, Bonnet MH, Bootzin RR, et al. Derivation of research diagnostic criteria for insomnia: report of an American Academy of Sleep Medicine Work Group. Sleep 2004;27:1567-96
60.  Bastien CH, Vallieres A, Morin CM. Validation of the Insomnia Severity Index as an outcome measure for insomnia research. Sleep Med 2001;2:297-307
61.  Blake DD, Weathers FW, Nagy LM, et al. The development of a clinician-administered PTSD scale. J Trauma Stress 1995;8:75-90
62.  Weathers FW, Keane TM, Davidson JR. Clinician-administered PTSD scale: a review of the first ten years of research. Depress Anxiety 2001;13:132-56
63.  Raskind MA, Peskind ER, Kanter ED, et al. Reduction of nightmares and other PTSD symptoms in combat veterans by prazosin: a placebo-controlled study. Am J Psychiatry 2003;160:371-3
64.  First M, Spitzer R, Williams J, Gibbon M. Structured Clincal Interview for the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-IV (DSM-IV). 4th ed. New York: Biomedics Research Department, New York State Psychiatric Institute, 1996
65.  Williams JB, Gibbon M, First MB, et al. The Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R (SCID): Multisite test-retest reliability Arch Gen Psychiatry 1992;49:630-6
66.  Edinger JD, Wyatt JK, Olsen MK, et al. Reliability and validity of the Duke Structured Interview for Sleep Disorders for insomnia screening. Paper presented at the 23rd Annual Meeting of the Associated Professional Sleep Societies, LLC. Seatlle, WA, 2009
67.  Morin CM. Insomnia: Psychological assessment and management. New York: Guilford Press, 1993
68.  Buysse DJ, Ancoli-Israel S, Edinger JD, Lichstein KL, Morin CM. Recommendations for a standard research assessment of insomnia. Sleep 2006;29:1155-73
69.  Morin CM. Measuring outcomes in randomized clinical trials of insomnia treatments. Sleep Med Rev 2003;7:263-79
70.  Iber C, Ancoli-Israel S, Chesson A, Quan SF. The AASM manual for the scoring of sleep and associated events: rules, terminology, and technical specifications. Westchester, IL: American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 2007
71.  Agnew HW, Webb WB, Williams RL. The first night effect: An EEG study of sleep. Psychophysiology 1966;2:263-6
72.  Morin CM, Bellevill G, Belanger L, Ivers H. The Insomnia Severity Index: Psychometric indicators to detect insomnia cases and evaluate treatment response. Sleep 2011;34:601-8
73.  Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF 3rd, Monk TH, Berman SR, Kupfer DJ. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index: A new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Res 1989;28:193-213
74.  Backhaus J, Junghanns K, Broocks A, Riemann D, Hohagen F. Test-retest reliability and validity of the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index in primary insomnia. J Psychosom Res 2002;53:737-40
75.  Johns MW. A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness: the Epworth sleepiness scale. Sleep 1991;14:540-5
76.  Johns MW. Sensitivity and specificity of the multiple sleep latency test (MSLT), the maintenance of wakefulness test and the epworth sleepiness scale: failure of the MSLT as a gold standard. J Sleep Res 2000;9:5-11
77.  Germain A, Hall M, Krakow B, Katherine SM, Buysse DJ. A brief sleep scale for posttraumatic stress disorder: Pittsburgh sleep quality index addendum for PTSD. J Anxiety Disord 2005;19:233-4
78.  Blanchard EB, Jones-Alexander J, Buckley TC, Forneris CA. Psychometric properties of the PTSD Checklist (PCL). Behav Res Ther 1996;34:669-73
79.  Beck AT, Steer RA, Garbin MG. Psychometric properties of the Beck Depression Inventory: Twenty-five years of evaluation. Clin Psychol Rev 1988;8:77-100
80.  Beck AT, Steer RA. Internal consistencies of the original and revised Beck Depression Inventory. J Clin Psychol 1984;40:1365-7
81.  Johnson DA, Heather BB. The sensitivity of the Beck depression inventory to changes of symptomatology. Br J Psychiatry 1974;125:184-5
82.  Reynolds WM, Gould JW. A psychometric investigation of the standard and short form Beck Depression Inventory. J Consult Clin Psychol 1981;49:306-7
83.  Kessler RC, Sonnega A, Bromet E, Hughes M, Nelson CB. Posttraumatic stress disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1995;52:1048-60
84.  Mundt JC, Marks IM, Shear MK, Greist JH. The Work and Social Adjustment Scale: a simple measure of impairment in functioning. Br J Psychiatry 2002;180:461-4
85.  Ancoli-Israel S, Cole R, Alessi C, Chambers M, Moorcroft W, Pollack CP. The role of actigraphy in the study of sleep and circadian rhythms. Sleep 2003;26:342-92
86.  Perlis ML, Jungquist CR, Smith MT, Posner D. Cognitive-behavioral treatment of insomnia: a session-by-session guide. New York, NY: Springer Science+Business Media, 2005
87.  Bootzin RR, Epstein D, Wood JM. Stimulus control instructions. In: Hauri PJ, ed. Case studies in insomnia. New York, NY: Plenum Publishing Corporation, 1991:19-28
88.  Bootzin RR, Perlis ML. Nonpharmacologic treatments of insomnia. J Clin Psychiatry 1992;53:37-41
89.  Spielman AJ, Saskin P, Thorpy MJ. Treatment of chronic insomnia by restriction of time in bed. Sleep 1987;10:45-56
90.  Levenson JC, Troxel WM, Begley A, et al. A qualitative approach to distinguishing older adults with insomnia from good sleeper controls. J Clin Sleep Med 2013;9:125-31
91.  Morin CM. The nature of insomnia and the need to redefine our diagnostic criteria. Psychosom Med 2000;62:483-5
92.  Dagan Y, Zinger Y, Lavie P. Actigraphic sleep monitoring in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) patients. J Psychosom Res 1997;42:577-81
93.  Klein E, Koren D, Arnon I, Lavie P. Sleep complaints are not corroborated by objective sleep measures in post-traumatic stress disorder: A 1-year prospective study in survivors of motor vehicle crashes. J Sleep Res 2003;12:35-41
94.  Tang NKY, Harvey AG. (Mis)perception of sleep in insomnia: a puzzle and a resolution. Psychol Bull 2012;138:77-101
95.  Perlis ML, Sharpe M, Smith MT, Greenblatt D, Giles D. Behavioral treatment of insomnia: treatment outcome and the relevance of medical and psychiatric morbidity. J Behav Med 2001;24:281-96 SLEEP, Vol. 37, No. 2, 2014

| Reference Number | Authors | Title | Journal | Year | Volume | Pages |
|------------------|---------|-------|---------|------|--------|-------|
| 96 | Hauri PJ | Can we mix behavioral therapy with hypnotics when treating insomniacs? | Sleep | 1997 | 20 | 1111-8 |
| 97 | Jacobs GD, Pace-Schott EF, Stickgold R, Otto MW | Cognitive behavior therapy and pharmacotherapy for insomnia: a randomized controlled trial and direct comparison | Arch Intern Med | 2004 | 164 | 1888-96 |
| 98 | Morin CM, Colecchi C, Stone J, Sood R, Brink D | Behavioral and pharmacological therapies for late-life insomnia | JAMA | 1999 | 281 | 991-9 |
| 99 | Hoge CW, Castro CA, Messer SC, McGurk D, Cotting DI, Koffman RL | Combat duty in Iraq and Afghanistan, mental health problems, and barriers to care | N Engl J Med | 2004 | 351 | 13-22 |
| 100 | Krakow B, Hollifield M, Johnston L, et al | Imagery rehearsal therapy for chronic nightmares in sexual assault survivors with posttraumatic stress disorder: a randomized controlled trial | JAMA | 2001 | 286 | 537-45 |
| 101 | Manber R, Edinger JD, Gross JL, San Pedro-Salcedo MG, Kuo TF, Kalista T | Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia enhances depression outcome in patients with comorbid major depressive disorder and insomnia | Sleep | 2008 | 31 | 489-95 |
| 102 | Zatzick DF, Marmar CR, Weiss DS, et al | Posttraumatic stress disorder and functioning and quality of life outcomes in a nationally representative sample of male Vietnam veterans | Am J Psychiatry | 1997 | 154 | 1690-5 |
| 103 | American Psychiatric Association | Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders | 4th ed text revision | Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association | 2000 |  |  | 