# Abstract

## Study Objectives
To use theory to design and evaluate an intervention to promote sleep hygiene and health among adolescents.

## Methods
The Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) and the Health Action Process Approach (HAPA) were used to develop an intervention, which was then evaluated in a cluster randomized trial. Participants were high school students (N = 2,841, M age = 15.12, SD = 1.50). Adolescents in the intervention group received four face-to-face sessions providing behavior change techniques targeting the theoretical determinants of sleep hygiene. Adolescents in the control group only received educational material at the end of the study. The primary outcome was sleep hygiene measured at 1 and 6 months postintervention. A number of secondary outcomes were also measured, including beliefs about sleep, self-regulatory processes, and outcomes related to health and wellbeing.

## Results
Sleep hygiene was improved in the intervention group when compared with the control group at both follow-up points (coefficients = 0.16 and 0.19, 95% CIs = 0.12–0.20 and 0.15–0.23 at 1 and 6 months, respectively, for scores on the Adolescent Sleep Hygiene Scale), as were psychosocial and general aspects of health. Mediation analyses suggested that beliefs about sleep hygiene as specified by the TPB, along with self-regulatory processes from HAPA, both mediated the effect of the intervention on outcomes. In turn, the effects of the intervention on sleep hygiene mediated its impact on general health.

## Conclusions
Healthcare practitioners might consider intervention programs based on the TPB and the HAPA to improve sleep among adolescents.

## Clinical Trial Registration
Clinicaltrials.gov (NCT02551913)

## Statement of Significance
Adolescents commonly have sleep problems that are often caused by poor sleep hygiene (e.g. using electronic devices before sleep). Several intervention programs have been designed to tackle such problems; however, they lack a solid theoretical background and so may fall short of promise. This manuscript describes a randomized controlled trial which provides evidence that two theoretical frameworks—namely, the Theory of Planned Behavior and the Health Action Process Action Approach—can be used to develop an intervention that is effective in promoting sleep hygiene in adolescents both 1 and 6 months following the intervention. The findings are significant because they suggest how to tackle the serious consequences of poor sleep.

## Key Words
adolescent; behavior; clustered randomized trial; health; sleep # Introduction

A good night’s sleep is vital to effective cognitive and emotional processing, physical and mental health outcomes, and to overall quality of life (QoL). The importance of sleep is particularly apparent in adolescence, where sleep plays a vital role in the development of cognition and emotion. Indeed, evidence suggests that difficulties getting to sleep (i.e. sleep onset latency or SOL) and/or difficulties staying asleep (i.e. wake after sleep onset or WASO) are associated with poorer learning, school performance, higher levels of depression and anxiety, poor somatic/psychosocial health, and risk behaviors in adolescents. Furthermore, evidence suggests that interventions that aim to improve sleep can improve daily performance, including working memory and capacity for learning. Sufficient sleep also reduces daytime sleepiness and improves mental health. Unfortunately, adolescents tend to have a later bedtime when compared with their bedtime in childhood, and estimates suggest that nearly 30 per cent of adolescents intentionally delay their sleep onset time. Evidence also supports a rising trend of sleep problems in adolescents (e.g. insomnia, short and disrupted sleep patterns, tiredness/fatigue, and short sleep duration). In short, finding ways to improve sleep, especially among adolescents, is a public health priority.

# Sleep hygiene in adolescence

Sleep hygiene is the collective term used to refer to behaviors and habits that can either facilitate sleep (e.g. creating an environment that is conducive to sleep, having a consistent routine, and avoiding caffeine before bed), or inhibit/interfere with sleep (e.g. using technology before bed and a bedroom that is too hot/cold). Evidence suggests that not getting enough sleep is often the result of poor sleep hygiene. For example, Kor and Mullan found that three behaviors were particularly relevant for University students: (1) avoiding going to bed hungry and thirsty, (2) avoiding activities that provoke anxiety and stress before bed, and (3) making the bedroom and sleep environment restful. These three behaviors have therefore been recommended as the target of interventions designed to improve sleep among university students or adolescents. We would also note that many adolescents live at home with their parents, who are likely to influence routines and the nature of the sleep environment. Like the adolescents themselves, parents may not be aware of the importance of sleep hygiene, suggesting that interventions might profitably target parents alongside adolescents.

# The Theory of Planned Behavior

The TPB proposes that the most salient and proximal predictor of behavior is behavioral intention—defined as self-instructions to perform particular behaviors or to obtain certain outcomes (e.g. “I intend to get enough sleep”). In turn, the TPB proposes that three beliefs (attitude, subjective norms, and perceived behavioral control) predict behavioral intention. Attitudes are the person’s cognitive and affective evaluations of the respective behavior (e.g. “Getting enough sleep would be worthwhile, but boring”); subjective norms reflect the extent to which individuals or groups that are important to the person agree that they should perform the respective action (e.g. “My parents would like me to go to sleep earlier”) and how much an individual wants to comply with these referents. Finally, perceived behavioral control indicates the extent to which an individual can control the respective behaviors (e.g. “I have little control over when I wake up”). The TPB has been found to provide an adequate account of self-reported sleep; however, the TPB is rarely used to develop interventions designed to improve sleep. We argue that this is a missed opportunity. If BCTs are identified that can modify the putative theoretical determinants of sleep-related behavior, then healthy sleep is likely to follow through more precise targeting of the active ingredients of change.

# The Health Action Process Approach

The TPB is, however, limited in that it does not consider the process(es) by which intentions are translated into action. Given the widely cited gap between intention and action, models such as the HAPA build on the motivational constructs specified by the TPB to consider self-regulatory processes like action and coping planning that might help us to explain why some intentions are translated into action, while others are not. Specifically, the HAPA suggests that changing behavior (e.g. improving sleep hygiene in an effort to get more sleep) involves two consecutive phases: (1) a motivational phase and (2) a self-regulatory phase. Although the TPB provides a reasonable account of the motivational factors that influence behavior, the self-regulatory phase of the HAPA suggests that action planning and coping planning are likely to be important in determining whether intentions are translated into action. That is, after an individual forms the intention to perform health behaviors (e.g. “I will try to go to sleep at the same time each evening”), action planning helps him or her to plan when, where, and how to perform such behaviors (e.g. “I will go to bed after I watch the 10pm news”) and coping planning helps him or her to design strategies to overcome anticipated barriers to performing such behaviors (e.g. “If I am tempted to look at Facebook before bed, then I will tell myself that it will still be there in the morning!”). The present research
====================

Sample size
-----------

Power analysis based on a medium-sized improvement in sleep hygiene (i.e. a change from 14 to 16 on the Sleep Hygiene Behaviors Scale), a standard deviation (SD) of 8.80 between the study groups 6 months after the intervention, an intracluster correlation coefficient (ICC) of 0.05, 20 per cent drop-out rate, and a significance level (α) of 0.01, suggested that 1330 adolescents would be needed in each group.

Randomization and blinding
---------------------------

Randomization was conducted by an independent statistician using a random sequence generator in STATA 13. Iran only has gender-specific schools; therefore, the adolescents in each high school were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio, stratified by gender, to either the intervention group or the control group. Due to the nature of intervention, it was not feasible for participants to be blind to condition. However, those who collected and analyzed the data were masked to the randomization status.

Intervention
------------

The intervention consisted of four group face-to-face sessions with the adolescents and one with their parents, each lasting around 60 min. Except for 73 dyads (5.12 per cent) who missed one session of the intervention and 62 dyads (4.35 per cent) who missed two sessions, the majority of participants (90.53 per cent) attended all four of the sessions. The sessions were scheduled at approximately 2 week intervals across 2 months. The content of each session was designed in accordance with the BCTs as defined by Michie et al. Examples include providing information about health consequences, pros and cons, comparative imagining of future outcomes, problem solving skills, and self-monitoring of behavior.

Table 1 provides a more detailed description of the BCTs, as well as the putative theoretical determinant of behavior that they were designed to target. Although self-monitoring is not a part of the TPB or HAPA, self-monitoring was included in the present intervention as it forms a core part of many interventions for promoting sleep and other frameworks for understanding self-regulation, including control theory. The intervention was delivered by two trained facilitators in the schools. Both of the facilitators had Master’s level degrees in a relevant discipline and at least 10 years’ experience of working with children and young people. The facilitators were trained in the delivery of the BCTs prior to the start of the main study.

The BCTs were divided across the four sessions as follows. In the first session, the adolescents and their parents received information about the importance of sleep, a definition of sleep and sleep cycles as well as a description of common sleep problems, sleeping needs for adolescents, factors associated with poor sleep in adolescents, and how poor sleep affects school performance and other outcomes. In the second session, the pros and cons of sleep hygiene behaviors, as well as getting up earlier on weekends were discussed. In the third session, the adolescents were encouraged to reconstruct their physical environments (e.g. their bedrooms) to facilitate sleeping. At the end of this session, the adolescents were provided with a planning sheet and asked to indicate when, where, and how they would perform sleep hygiene behaviors every night. The adolescents were then asked to formulate three strategies for each sleep hygiene behavior. In addition, the adolescents were provided a second planning sheet. | Flow of participants through the study |
|----------------------------------------|
| Assessed for eligibility (n = 79 clusters) |
| Excluded (n = 9 clusters) |
| Clusters did not meet inclusion criteria (n = 6) |
| Clusters declined to participate (n = 3) |
| n = 48 clusters enrolled |
| Baseline assessment |
| Randomised (n = 48 clusters) |
| Allocated to intervention group (n = 24 clusters) | Allocated to control group (n = 24 clusters) |
| n = 1538 participants approached | n = 1583 participants approached |
| n = 1482 (96%) eligible | n = 1499 (95%) eligible |
| n = 1416 (95%) consented | n = 1425 (95%) consented |
| Received allocated intervention (n = 24 clusters) | Received allocated control (n = 24 clusters) |
| Lost to follow-up (n = 39 participants) | Lost to follow-up (n = 43 participants) |
| Lost to follow-up (n = 31 participants) | Lost to follow-up (n = 39 participants) |
| All available data were analyzed (i.e., intention to treat analysis) |

and asked to anticipate potential barriers that could interfere with performing sleep hygiene behaviors. They were asked then to provide strategies to overcome anticipated barriers to performing each sleep hygiene behavior. In the final session, the adolescents’ parents were asked to monitor their children’s progress and provide feedback. In addition, the adolescents were provided a daily sleep diary based on the Pittsburgh Sleep Diary.

Adolescents in the control group did not receive any intervention and continued with their usual school curriculum. However, at the end of the study, adolescents in the control group received educational material related to sleep hygiene. None of the participants received any incentives during the study period.

Primary outcomes
Adolescent Sleep Hygiene Scale
The Adolescent Sleep Hygiene Scale (ASHS) contains 32 items designed to measure aspects of sleep hygiene among Table 1. BCTs employed in the intervention and the outcome(s) that they target

| BCT                                                 | Brief description                                                                 | Targeted outcome(s)                                         |
|-----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| BCT 5.1: Information about health consequences       | Explain that adolescents need between 9 and 10 hr of sleep every day to function best. According to the World Health Organization as well as the National Sleep Foundation. Less sleep (specifically, less than 7 hr per night) may affect the cardiovascular, endocrine, immune, and nervous systems, including anxiety, depression, obesity, diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance | Attitudes towards and intentions to perform sleep hygiene behaviors |
| BCT 9.2: Pros & cons                                | Outline the potential risks of insufficient sleep (e.g. blood pressure, stroke, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases). The adolescents were asked to list the potential risks of poor sleep and the potential benefits of good sleep (e.g. “If I sleep enough daily, then I will have a healthier life”) | Attitudes toward and intentions to perform sleep hygiene behaviors |
| BCT 12.1: Reconstructing the physical environment    | Recommendations for making the bedroom more comfortable for sleeping (e.g. keep the temperature in your bedroom comfortable) | Perceived behavioral control                                 |
| BCT 3.2: Social support                             | Encourage parents to attend the face-to-face sessions with the adolescents. In addition, encourage parents to provide feedback and monitor their adolescent’s plans and use of a sleep diary | Subjective norms                                           |
| BCT 1.4: Action planning                            | Ask adolescents to create two plans specifying what (sleep hygiene behaviors), when (day), and where (place) they would sleep | Action planning                                            |
| BCT 1.2: Problem solving                            | Ask adolescents to identify barriers that they might encounter when trying to sleep and generate strategies to overcome them. For example, “If I cannot sleep because I am worried about an exam the next day, then I will take a warm bath” | Coping planning                                           |
| BCT 2.3: Self-monitoring of behavior                | Provide adolescents with a diary and ask them to indicate length and timing of their sleep, times woken during the night, and reasons for waking each day for a month | Self-monitoring*                                          |

The labels and numbers of the BCTs are from Michie et al’s taxonomy.
*Self-monitoring was included in the present intervention as it forms a core part of many interventions for promoting sleep and other frameworks for understanding self-regulation, including control theory.

adolescents. The ASHS assesses how often adolescents have done a series of things related to sleep (e.g. “During the hour before bedtime, I do things that make me feel very awake [e.g. playing video games, watching TV, talking on the telephone]”) during the past month on a six-point Likert scale (1 = never; 6 = always). Cronbach’s α indicated that the ASHS was internally reliable (α = 0.86, 0.82, and 0.88 for baseline, 3 month, and 6 month follow-ups, respectively) and so total scores were computed for use in the analysis.

Sleep duration
Sleep duration was calculated using four items that asked participants to report the time that they fell asleep and woke up, respectively, during week days and weekend days. Sleep duration was estimated by computing the difference between wake-up time and time fallen asleep separately for week days and weekend days. We then used this information to compute the average sleep duration over 7 nights using the following equation: Sleep duration = (5 × weekday sleep duration) + (2 × weekend sleep duration)/7.

Secondary outcomes

Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale
The Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale (PDSS) contains eight items designed to measure daytime sleepiness—e.g. “How often do you fall asleep or get drowsy during class periods?” Adolescents were asked to respond on a five-point Likert scale (0 = Never; 4 = Always). The internal consistency (α) for this scale was found to be 0.91, 0.93, and 0.89 for baseline, 3 month, and 6 month follow-ups, respectively. A summated total score was used for the PSQI in this study.

Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index
The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) contains 19 items designed to measure sleep quality and disturbance—e.g. “During the past month, how often have you had trouble sleeping because you had bad dreams?” Adolescents were asked to respond on a four-point Likert scale from Not during the past month to Three times a week or more such that higher scores indicate poorer sleep quality. The internal reliability of this scale was satisfactory (α = 0.83, 0.84, and 0.79 for baseline, 3 month, and 6 month follow-ups, respectively). A summated total score was used for the PSQI in this study.

Sleep Disturbance Scale for Children
The Sleep Disturbance Scale for Children (SDSC) is a questionnaire that parents complete to assess the sleep quality of their child during the past 6 months. The SDSC contains 27 items (e.g. “The child feels anxious or afraid when falling asleep”) that the parent was asked to rate on a five-point Likert scale from Never to Always. The reliability of the SDSC scale was found to be satisfactory (α = 0.88, 0.87, and 0.82 for baseline, 3 month, and 6 month follow-ups, respectively). A summated total score was used for the SDSC in this study. ## Secondary outcomes

### Sleep knowledge
Knowledge about aspects of sleep was measured using the 15-item Sleep Knowledge Questionnaire, which was developed by Gallasch and Gradisar and an extension of the Sleep Hygiene Awareness and Practice Scale (e.g. “Going to bed hungry benefits sleep”). Participants were asked to indicate whether each item was true or false. Two marks were given to a correct answer, a “don’t know” answer received 0 marks, whereas an incorrect answer resulted in 2 marks being deducted. The scores on each item were summed to provide a score ranging from −30 to 30, where a higher score indicates better knowledge about sleep. The internal consistency (α) for this scale was 0.87, 0.78, and 0.84 for baseline, 3 month, and 6 month follow-up, respectively.

### Action planning and coping planning
Action planning was measured by asking adolescents whether they had specified “when,” “where,” “how,” and “how often” they would perform the focal sleep hygiene behaviors. Participants responded to each item on a five-point Likert-type scale (where 1 = totally disagree and 5 = totally agree), and the items were combined such that higher scores indicate better action planning. Coping planning was assessed using five items reflecting whether adolescents had planned how to resolve potential barriers to performing sleep hygiene behaviors. The internal consistency (α) for action planning was 0.88, 0.85, and 0.86 for baseline, 3 month, and 6 month follow-ups, respectively; for coping planning scales 0.86, 0.83, and 0.90 for baseline, 3 month, and 6 month follow-ups, respectively.

### General Health Questionnaire
The 12-item version of the General Health Questionnaire (GHQ; e.g. “You are able to concentrate”) validated for use with Iranian samples was used in the present study. The GHQ measures the health, especially the psychiatric well-being, of an individual. Adolescents were asked to respond on a four-point Likert scale from Less than usual to Much more than usual, and a higher score indicates poor health. The internal consistency (α) for this scale was 0.81, 0.85, and 0.91 for baseline, 3 month, and 6 month follow-ups, respectively. A summated total score was used for the GHQ in this study.

### Health-related QoL
The child-reported Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory (PedsQL) was used to assess QoL. The PedsQL contains 23 items that assess physical (e.g. “It is hard for me to walk more than one block”), emotional (e.g. “I feel afraid or scared”), social (e.g. “Other teens tease me”), and school (e.g. “It’s hard to pay attention in class”) aspects of QoL. Adolescents were asked to respond on a five-point Likert scale from Never a problem to Almost always a problem; then, all the item scores are linearly transformed into a 0–100 scale. Two summary scores were computed—physical health and psychosocial health—and higher scores on each indicate a better QoL. The internal consistency (α) was 0.86, 0.89, and 0.92 for baseline, 3 month, and 6 month follow-ups, respectively (physical health); 0.88, 0.76, and 0.84 for baseline, 3 month, and 6 month follow-ups, respectively (psychosocial health).

### TPB variables
The four beliefs specified by the TPB—attitude, subjective norm, perceived behavioral control, and (behavioral) intention—were each measured using a series of items to which participants responded on five-point Likert scales. The items reflecting each belief were combined such that higher scores indicate more positive attitudes (12 items; sample item: “Making my bedroom/sleep environment restful would make me feel rested in the morning”, α = 0.93, 0.90, and 0.91 for baseline, 3 month, and 6 month follow-ups, respectively), more favorable subjective norms (three items; sample item: “People who are important to me think I should not have anxiety-provoking activity before bedtime,” α = 0.85, 0.80, and 0.83 for baseline, 3 month, and 6 month follow-ups, respectively), greater perceived behavioral control (three items; sample item: “I am confident that every day I can prevent anxiety-provoking activity before bedtime,” α = 0.84, 0.89, and 0.85 for baseline, 3 month, and 6 month follow-ups, respectively).

We also conducted mediation analyses following Krull and MacKinnon’s recommendations, which involve (1) assessing the direct effect of the intervention on outcomes, (2) assessing the effects of the intervention on the potential mediators, and finally, (3) computing the effects of the changes in the mediators on the outcomes. We conducted two mediation analyses. The first examined whether changes in beliefs and self-regulatory. processes mediated any effects of the intervention on sleep hygiene. Therefore, we used ASHS scores measured at 6 month postintervention as the dependent variable and variables specified by TPB and HAPA measured at 1 month postintervention as potential mediators. The second mediation analysis examined whether changes in sleep hygiene behavior mediated any effects of the intervention on health. Therefore, we used PSQI and GHQ measured at 6 month postintervention as the dependent variables and ASHS score measured at 6 month postintervention as the mediator. The mediation analyses controlled for age, gender, and baseline measures of the outcome and mediators (i.e. TPB and HAPA variables, ASHS, PSQI, and GHQ), where relevant.

## Results
The control and intervention groups had similar demographic characteristics (Table 2). Specifically, the mean age of the adolescents in the control group was 15.12 years (SD = 1.50) and the mean age of the adolescents in the intervention group was 15.51 years (SD = 1.08; p < 0.001). Slightly less than half of the participants were male in each of the conditions (48.0 percent in the control group and 45.1 percent in the intervention group; p = 0.11).

Table 3 describes the sleep patterns, sleep hygiene, sleep quality, and health status of both groups at baseline, 1 month, and 6 month follow-ups.

### Effects of the intervention on primary outcomes
The intervention had promising effects on all of the primary outcomes. Specifically, sleep hygiene was improved among adolescents in the intervention group when compared with adolescents in the control group at both follow-ups, as suggested by scores on the ASHS (p < 0.001 for both 1 and 6 months). Similar improvements were shown in daytime sleepiness (i.e. adolescents in the

## Table 2. Demographic characteristics by condition (N = 2841)

| School characteristics                                   | Control (n = 1416) | Intervention (n = 1425) | p Value for the comparison |
|--------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|
| Number of schools recruited                             | 26                  | 26                       |                            |
| Number of students per class; mean (SD)               | 27.23 (3.21)       | 27.40 (3.19)            |                            |
| Individual characteristics                               |                     |                          |                            |
| Age in years; mean (SD)                               | 15.12 (1.50)       | 15.51(1.08)             | < 0.001                   |
| Number of males; n (%)                                 | 680 (48.0%)        | 642 (45.1%)             | 0.11                      |
| Father’s education (year); mean (SD)                  | 7.94 (2.35)        | 7.72 (3.24)             | 0.04                      |
| Mother’s education (year); mean (SD)                  | 6.98 (4.11)        | 6.73 (2.69)             | 0.06                      |
| Monthly family income; n (%)                           |                     |                          | <0.001                   |
| High (>US$1000)                                       | 405 (28.6%)        | 456 (29.8%)             |                            |
| Intermediate (US$500–US$1000)                         | 581 (41.0%)        | 661 (41.9%)             |                            |
| Low (<US$500)                                         | 430 (30.4%)        | 308 (26.4%)             |                            |

## Table 3. Descriptive statistics for all outcome measures by condition and time

| Outcome                                              | Control (n = 1416) | Intervention (n = 1425) |
|-----------------------------------------------------|---------------------|--------------------------|
|                                                     | Baseline | Month 1 | Month 6 | Baseline | Month 1 | Month 6 |
| Time asleep at weekdays (hr: min)                   | 24:14 (0.34) | 24:09 (0.28) | 24:13 (0.20) | 24:10 (0.45) | 23:56 (0.31) | 23:29 (0.32) |
| Wake time at weekdays (hr: min)                      | 7:21 (0.26) | 7:12 (0.22) | 7:05 (0.18) | 7:29 (0.12) | 7:24 (0.11) | 7:14 (0.13) |
| Sleep duration at weekdays (hr)                      | 7.07 (0.28) | 7.03 (0.19) | 6.52 (0.20) | 7.19 (0.21) | 7.30 (0.15) | 7.45 (0.14) |
| Time asleep at weekends (hr: min)                    | 1:02 (0.11) | 24:55 (0.21) | 1:06 (0.24) | 24:52 (0.27) | 24:29 (0.19) | 24:27 (0.17) |
| Wake time at weekends (hr: min)                      | 10:47 (0.31) | 10:18 (0.28) | 10:39 (0.33) | 10:25 (0.20) | 10:20 (0.34) | 10:26 (0.30) |
| Sleep duration at weekends (hr)                      | 9.45 (0.16) | 9.23 (0.14) | 9.33 (0.12) | 9.33 (0.24) | 9.51 (0.23) | 9.59 (0.28) |
| Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale                   | 10.46 (4.68) | 10.83 (4.84) | 10.81 (4.11) | 10.82 (5.31) | 8.13 (3.92) | 8.02 (3.64) |
| General Health Questionnaire                           | 18.80 (3.14) | 18.84 (3.38) | 18.86 (3.52) | 18.66 (3.07) | 18.52 (3.23) | 17.44 (3.50) |
| Adolescent Sleep Hygiene Scale                        | 3.67 (0.34) | 3.66 (0.55) | 3.64 (0.42) | 3.76 (0.44) | 3.90 (0.51) | 3.91 (0.33) |
| Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index                        | 6.13 (2.07) | 6.16 (2.30) | 6.22 (2.58) | 6.08 (2.90) | 4.60 (2.20) | 4.57 (2.43) |
| Sleep Disturbance Scale for Children*                | 62.37 (9.01) | 62.61 (9.79) | 63.39 (9.61) | 62.39 (10.04) | 49.18 (9.41) | 48.14 (10.15) |
| PedsQL physical health†                              | 60.31 (12.80) | 60.51 (15.26) | 60.08 (12.83) | 60.77 (12.21) | 61.07 (14.65) | 62.55 (14.45) |
| PedsQL psychosocial health†                          | 74.08 (15.75) | 70.06 (15.49) | 68.19 (0.17.67) | 74.43 (16.52) | 78.28 (13.82) | 81.25 (14.72) |
| Sleep knowledge                                       | 7.03 (2.57) | 7.06 (2.11) | 7.02 (2.29) | 7.11 (2.70) | 10.02 (3.17) | 10.07 (3.46) |
| Attitude                                              | 4.07 (0.57) | 4.03 (0.52) | 3.96 (0.78) | 4.15 (0.50) | 4.70 (0.47) | 4.69 (0.56) |
| Subjective norms                                      | 3.31 (0.67) | 3.27 (0.54) | 3.25 (0.64) | 3.37 (0.63) | 3.80 (0.50) | 3.81 (0.61) |
| Perceived behavioral control                          | 3.61 (0.76) | 3.58 (0.69) | 3.55 (0.71) | 3.74 (0.79) | 4.12 (0.78) | 4.09 (0.68) |
| Intention                                             | 3.73 (0.81) | 3.71 (0.73) | 3.70 (0.66) | 3.84 (0.59) | 4.31 (0.69) | 4.32 (0.61) |
| Action planning                                       | 2.75 (0.62) | 2.69 (0.71) | 2.67 (0.68) | 2.80 (0.75) | 3.30 (0.67) | 3.31 (0.71) |
| Coping planning                                       | 2.71 (0.79) | 2.67 (0.73) | 2.59 (0.79) | 2.78 (0.73) | 3.52 (0.81) | 3.53 (0.74) |

*Reported by parents.
Standard deviations are in parentheses.
†The PedsQL scores were transformed into a 0–100 scale using the suggestions from PedsQL manual: raw score of 0 = 100; 1 = 75; 2 = 50; 3 = 25; 4 = 0. | |Adolescent Sleep Hygiene Scale|Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale|Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index|Sleep Disturbance Scale for Children*|Sleep duration at weekdays|Sleep duration at weekend|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Intervention (vs. control)|B (SE) p (95%CI)|B (SE) p (95%CI)|B (SE) (95%CI)|B (SE) (95%CI)|B (SE) (95%CI)|B (SE) (95%CI)|
| |0.07 (0.04) 0.08 (−0.01, 0.15)|0.01 (0.04) 0.80 (−0.07, 0.09)|0.15 (0.34) 0.659 (−0.52, 0.82)|−0.02 (0.04) 0.617 (−0.06, 0.1)|0.08 (0.04) 0.045 (0.001, 0.16)|0.10 (0.24) 0.677 (−0.37, 0.57)|
|Month 1 (vs. baseline)|0.13 (0.12) 0.279 (−0.11, 0.37)|−0.31 (0.01) <0.001 (−0.33, −0.29)|0.03 (0.03) 0.317 (−0.03, 0.09)|−0.63 (0.02) <0.001 (−0.67, −0.59)|−0.03 (0.03) 0.317 (−0.09, 0.03)|0.21 (0.03) <0.001 (0.15, 0.27)|
|Month 6 (vs. baseline)|0.14 (0.01) <0.001 (0.12, 0.16)|−0.30 (0.02) <0.001 (−0.34, −0.26)|0.07 (0.03) 0.020 (0.01, 0.13)|−0.41 (0.04) <0.001 (−0.49, −0.33)|0.53 (0.03) <0.001 (0.47, 0.59)|0.12 (0.03) <0.001 (0.06, 0.18)|
|Intervention (vs. control at 1 month)|0.16 (0.02) <0.001 (0.12, 0.20)|−0.39 (0.02) <0.001 (−0.43, −0.35)|−0.52 (0.05) <0.001 (−0.62, −0.42)|−0.64 (0.02) <0.001 (−0.68, −0.60)|0.14 (0.04) <0.001 (0.06, 0.22)|0.40 (0.05) <0.001 (0.30, 0.50)|
|Intervention (vs. control at 6 months)|0.19 (0.02) <0.001 (0.15, 0.23)|−0.38 (0.02) <0.001 (−0.42, −0.34)|−0.59 (0.05) <0.001 (−0.69, −0.49)|−0.73 (0.03) <0.001 (−0.79, −0.67)|0.48 (0.03) <0.001 (0.42, 0.54)|0.38 (0.07) <0.001 (0.24, 0.52)|
|Age|0.01 (0.01) 0.317 (−0.10, 0.03)|0.15 (0.03) <0.001 (0.09, 0.21)|0.18 (0.04) <0.001 (0.10, 0.26)|0.05 (0.01) <0.001 (0.03, 0.07)|−0.25 (0.02) <0.001 (−0.29, −0.21)|−0.21 (0.02) <0.001 (−0.25, −0.17)|
|Female (vs. Male)|−0.14 (0.15) 0.351 (−0.43, 0.15)|0.18 (0.14) 0.198 (−0.09, 0.45)|0.16 (0.15) 0.289 (−0.13, 0.45)|0.11 (0.13) 0.395 (−0.14, 0.36)|−0.14 (0.22) 0.525 (−0.57, 0.29)|0.38 (0.28) 0.175 (−0.17, 0.93)|
|Father Education|0.25 (0.14) 0.074 (−0.02, 0.52)|0.20 (0.14) 0.153 (−0.07, 0.47)|0.05 (0.15) 0.741 (−0.24, 0.34)|0.02 (0.12) 0.865 (−0.22, 0.25)|0.08 (0.21) 0.703 (−0.33, 0.49)|0.13 (0.17) 0.445 (−0.20, 0.46)|
|Intercept|0.74 (0.02) <0.001 (0.70, 0.78)|2.30 (0.22) <0.001 (1.87, 2.73)|0.44 (0.11) <0.001 (0.22, 0.66)|0.52 (0.20) 0.009 (0.13, 0.91)|2.17 (0.21) <0.001 (1.76, 2.58)|1.63 (0.22) <0.001 (1.20, 2.06)|
|σst² (student)|0.87 (0.03) <0.001 (0.81, 0.93)|0.80 (0.20) <0.001 (0.76, 0.84)|0.92 (0.03) <0.001 (0.86, 0.98)|0.68 (0.02) <0.001 (0.64, 0.72)|0.70 (0.02) <0.001 (0.66, 0.74)|0.78 (0.02) <0.001 (0.74, 0.82)|
|σs² c(school)|0.11 (0.002) <0.001 (0.11, 0.11)|0.12 (0.002) <0.001 (0.11, 0.12)|0.07 (0.001) <0.001 (0.07, 0.07)|0.21 (0.004) <0.001 (0.20, 0.22)|0.59 (0.01) <0.001 (0.57, 0.61)|0.19 (0.004) <0.001 (0.18, 0.20)| Consistent with this idea, sleep hygiene (i.e. scores on the ASHS) mediated the relationship between the intervention program and two secondary outcomes (GHQ and PSQI; p’s < 0.001, see Supplementary Table 4). One possible reason is that physical health may need longer than psychosocial health to improve. Another possibility is that physical health cannot be improved through an intervention targeting sleep hygiene. Future studies using a longer time frame are warranted to examine whether physical health can be improved using a theory-based intervention targeting sleep hygiene.

## Discussion
The present research found that a theory-based intervention improved sleep outcomes among adolescents, as evidenced by improved sleep patterns, sleep quality, knowledge about sleep, and performance of sleep hygiene behaviors. These beneficial effects were mediated by changes in the putative determinants of behavior, as specified by the TPB (i.e. attitude, subjective norms, perceived behavioral control, and intention) and the HAPA (i.e. action and coping planning). Furthermore, as a consequence of the improvements in sleep, the intervention also had positive effects on adolescents’ health and QoL. The implication is that researchers and practitioners interested in improving sleep, particularly among adolescents, might draw on the insights provided by the TPB and HAPA in order to design effective interventions to improve sleep among adolescents.

The finding that the improvements in sleep following the intervention accrued (in part) from changes in motivational variables specified by the TPB support the findings of previous studies, which suggest that the TPB is an effective model for understanding the performance of sleep hygiene behaviors. However, the present findings go beyond these (correlational) studies to show that changes in the putative determinants of action lead to changes in the respective behaviors (and, as a consequence, the outcomes). Consequently, the present research provides experimental support for the TPB as a framework for improving sleep.

The present findings also support the idea that it is important for interventions to target self-regulatory processes, such as those specified in the HAPA, in addition to motivational variables (i.e. those specified by the TPB). That is, adolescents in the intervention condition were prompted to form plans specifying when, where, and how they would perform sleep hygiene behaviors, as well as how they would deal with potential obstacles. As a result, they evidenced better action and coping planning when compared with adolescents in the control condition and, again, these changes mediated the effect of the intervention on outcomes. These findings support those of correlational studies that point to the importance of self-regulatory processes in predicting sleep hygiene and related outcomes and also the findings of Deng et al. who found that an intervention based on the HAPA improved sleep quality among patients with obstructive sleep apnea. Taken together then, the present research suggests that targeting the motivational and self-regulatory processes that are specified by the TPB and HAPA can lead to changes in the respective behaviors.

As a consequence of the improvements in sleep, the present research also found that the intervention improved the health of the adolescents, particularly in psychosocial aspects; that is, scores on the GHQ and PedsQL psychosocial health were improved among adolescents in the intervention, relative to those in the control condition at both 1 and 6 month follow-ups, whereas scores on the PedsQL physical health were similar at both follow-ups. Other studies have also found that sleep hygiene is associated with psychosocial health, perhaps because good sleep hygiene improves sleep quality and helps adolescents to recover from daily physical and psychological exertions.

Finally, although the present intervention included parents in some aspects of the intervention, the influence of the intervention on parents and whether and how they influenced... the beliefs and behaviors of their adolescent children was not assessed (beyond the examination of adolescents’ normative beliefs, which may have included the views of their parents). The effect of including parents in sleep interventions is therefore not clear and future research might consider factorial designs that systematically manipulate key components of the intervention (e.g. inclusion versus exclusion of parents), in order to isolate the impact of different components of the intervention on outcomes. It will also be important to explore the best way to deliver these (or similar) interventions outside of the context of a research study. One possibility is that the intervention could be delivered in the form of an elective for students and families in a school setting.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary material is available at SLEEP online.

Funding

None declared.

Acknowledgments
We sincerely thank all of the participants and the research assistants in this study.
Conflict of interest statement. None declared. 31. Knowlden AP, et al. A Theory of Planned Behavior research model for predicting the sleep intentions and behaviors of undergraduate college students. J Prim Prev. 2012;33(1):19–31.
32. Lao HC, et al. Theory of planned behaviour and healthy sleep of college students. Aust J Psychol. 2016;68:20–28.
33. Strong C, et al. Sleep hygiene behaviours in Iranian adolescents: an application of the Theory of Planned Behavior. J Sleep Res. 2018;27(1):23–31.
34. Sheeran P. Intention-behavior relations: a conceptual and empirical review. In: Stroebe W. and Hewstone M., eds. European Review of Social Psychology. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.; 2002: 1–30.
35. Webb TL, et al. Does changing behavioral intentions engender behavior change? A meta-analysis of the experimental evidence. Psychol Bull. 2006;132(2):249–268.
36. Schwarzer R. Modeling health behavior change. How to predict and modify the adoption and maintenance of health behaviors. Applied Psychology. 2008;57(1):1–29.
37. Lin CY, et al. The relationship between the theory of planned behavior and medication adherence in patients with epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav. 2016;61:231–236.
38. Pakpour AH, et al. Action and coping planning with regard to dental brushing among Iranian adolescents. Psychol Health Med. 2012;17(2):176–187.
39. Godin G, et al. The effect of mere-measurement of cognitions on physical activity behavior: a randomized controlled trial among overweight and obese individuals. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2011;8:2.
40. Lin CY, et al. A cluster randomised controlled trial of an intervention based on the Health Action Process Approach for increasing fruit and vegetable consumption in Iranian adolescents. Psychol Health. 2017;32(12):1449–1468.
41. Deng T, et al. Stage-matched intervention for adherence to CPAP in patients with obstructive sleep apnea: a randomized controlled trial. Sleep Breath. 2013;17(2):791–801.
42. Storfer-Isser A, et al. Psychometric properties of the Adolescent Sleep Hygiene Scale. J Sleep Res. 2013;22(6):707–716.
43. Mairs L, et al. Self-monitoring vs. implementation intentions: a comparison of behaviour change techniques to improve sleep hygiene and sleep outcomes in students. Int J Behav Med. 2015;22(5):635–644.
44. Carver CS, et al. Control theory: a useful conceptual framework for personality-social, clinical, and health psychology. Psychol Bull. 1982;92(1):111–135.
45. Monk TH, et al. The Pittsburgh Sleep Diary. J Sleep Res. 1994;3(2):111–120.
46. Lin C-Y, et al. (accepted). Validating the Persian adolescent sleep hygiene scale revised version (ASHSr) using comprehensive psychometric testing methods. Sleep Med. 2018;50:63–71.
47. Kong AP, et al. Associations of sleep duration with obesity and serum lipid profile in children and adolescents. Sleep Med. 2011;12(7):659–665.
48. Drake C, et al. The pediatric daytime sleepiness scale (PDSS): sleep habits and school outcomes in middle-school children. Sleep. 2003;26(4):455–458.
49. Farrahi Moghaddam J, et al. Reliability and validity of the Persian version of the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI-P). Sleep Breath. 2012;16(1):79–82.
50. Bruni O, et al. The Sleep Disturbance Scale for Children (SDSC). Construction and validation of an instrument to evaluate sleep disturbances in childhood and adolescence. J Sleep Res. 1996;5(4):251–261.
51. Gallasch J, et al. Relationships between sleep knowledge, sleep practice and sleep quality. Sleep Biol Rhythms. 2007;5:63–73.
52. Montazeri A, et al. The 12-item General Health Questionnaire (GHQ-12): translation and validation study of the Iranian version. Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2003;1:66.
53. Lin CY, et al. Psychometric properties and gender invariance of the Chinese version of the self-report Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory version 4.0: short form is acceptable. Qual Life Res. 2012;21(1):177–182.
54. Varni JW, et al. PedsQL 4.0: reliability and validity of the Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory version 4.0 generic core scales in healthy and patient populations. Med Care. 2001;39(8):800–812.
55. Campbell IG, et al. Daytime sleepiness increases with age in early adolescence: a sleep restriction dose-response study. Sleep. 2017;40(5): zsx046.
56. Carskadon MA, et al. Pubertal changes in daytime sleepiness. Sleep. 1980;2(4):453–460.
57. Campbell IG, et al. The increase in longitudinally measured sleepiness across adolescence is related to the maturational decline in low-frequency EEG power. Sleep. 2007;30(12):1677–1687.
58. Mallampalli MP, et al. Exploring sex and gender differences in sleep health: a Society for Women’s Health Research Report. J Womens Health (Larchmt). 2014;23(7):553–562.
59. Galland BC, et al. Gender differences in sleep hygiene practices and sleep quality in New Zealand adolescents aged 15 to 17 years. Sleep Health. 2017;3(2):77–83.
60. Krull JL, et al. Multilevel mediation modeling in group-based intervention studies. Eval Rev. 1999;23(4):418–444.
61. Marhefka JK. Sleep deprivation: consequences for students. J Psychosoc Nurs Ment Health Serv. 2011;49(9):20–25.
62. Barber LK, et al. Consistent-sufficient sleep predicts improvement in self-regulatory performance and psychology strain. Stress Health. 2011;27:314–324.
63. Argyropoulos SV, et al. Correlation of subjective and objective sleep measurements at different stages of the treatment of depression. Psychiatry Res. 2003;120(2):179–190.
64. Ghanizadeh A, et al. Sleep patterns and habits in high school students in Iran. Ann Gen Psychiatry. 2008;7:5.
65. Lund HG, et al. Sleep patterns and predictors of disturbed sleep in a large population of college students. J Adolesc Health. 2010;46(2):124–132. 