# REVIEW ARTICLE

## The Benzodiazepine Receptor

### Summary
The benzodiazepines are among the most widely used drugs in the world. When first introduced, little was known about their mechanism of action. However, in the last 20 years, our understanding of the chemistry and function of the central nervous system (CNS) has increased substantially. This knowledge has shed some light on the mechanism of action of the benzodiazepines and other centrally acting drugs. It is well established that the benzodiazepines act by combining with specific receptors in the central nervous system. These receptors are anatomically in close association with gamma amino butyric acid (GABA) receptors and appear to reside on the neuronal membrane in the same supramolecular protein complex: GABA is the major inhibitory neurotransmitter of the CNS. The benzodiazepines act by increasing the affinity of the GABA receptor for its ligand, thereby augmenting the inhibitory effect of a given concentration of GABA. Two hypotheses of benzodiazepine ligand-receptor interactions in this supramolecular protein complex have been proposed: (1) multiple receptor subtypes analogous to the opioid receptors; (2) single receptor with multiple conformations. The multiple receptor hypothesis suggests that each pharmacologic effect of the benzodiazepines (i.e., anxiolysis) is mediated by interaction with a specific receptor subtype. On the other hand, the alternative hypothesis suggests that only one receptor exists which has a dynamic conformation. Experimental evidence in support of each hypothesis is presented and critically evaluated.

### Introduction
Since the introduction of benzodiazepines in the early 1960s, they have rapidly gained wide acceptance due to their desirable anxiolytic, hypnotic, anticonvulsant, and muscle relaxant pharmacologic effects. However, at that time little was known about their mechanisms of action. In the last 20 years our knowledge and understanding of the chemistry and function of the central nervous system (CNS) has increased substantially. This new knowledge has shed some light on the mechanism of action of the benzodiazepines and other centrally acting drugs. In the CNS, as in the peripheral nervous system, neurohumoral transmitters are the major method of interneural communication. The presynaptic neurons when stimulated release quanta of the neurohumoral transmitter into the synaptic cleft which diffuses across the cleft and combines with specific receptors on the postsynaptic membrane. It is believed the combination of neurohumoral transmitter and receptor produces a conformational change in the structure of the postsynaptic membrane altering its permeability to specific ions. Depending on the number of receptor-neurotransmitter complexes so formed, and the ionic species to which altered membrane permeability has been produced, the postsynaptic neuron is either excited (depolarized), made more excitable (resting membrane voltage raised closer to firing threshold), or made less excitable. In this way information being sent to the postsynaptic neuron is either transmitted or modulated.

### GABA the Major Inhibitory Neurotransmitter in the CNS
It is now well established that GABA and glycine are the two major inhibitory neurotransmitters of the CNS. GABA appears to act primarily in the brain and glycine in the spinal cord. Both substances when applied iontophoretically to neurons with specific receptors for these neurotransmitters, produce a rapid increase in membrane chloride ion permeability. The rapid influx of negatively charged chloride ions into the neuron increases the electronegativity of the neural cytoplasm versus the extracellular fluid: The magnitude of charge separation across the neural membrane is, therefore, greater. The membrane is said to be hyperpolarized: The hyperpolarization moves the resting membrane potential away from the threshold firing voltage, resulting in a neuron which is more difficult to excite. Its activity is, therefore, depressed:

### GABA Protection against Seizures

A critical role of the GABAergic system can be demonstrated as it relates to seizure protection: It has been said that the natural state of the brain is one of total chaos. The GABAergic system, especially in the substantia nigra of the basal ganglia, has been shown to be critical in protection against seizure propagation: Injection of GABA bilaterally into the substantia nigra was capable of completely suppressing seizures induced by electroshock or administration of pentylenetetrazole, a known convulsant: Furthermore, any drug which acted to increase GABA in this area also afforded protection against seizures. Gamma vinyl GABA (GVG), an irreversible catalytic inhibitor of GABA transaminase, causes an increase in GABA by blocking its metabolism. It likewise was shown to protect against seizure propagation when injected into the substantia nigra. Injection of muscimol, a GABA agonist, into the substantia nigra, like GABA itself, afforded seizure protection. Conversely, drugs which block GABA release (pentylenetetrazole), block the GABA receptor (bicuculline), or block GABA receptor coupling to open the chloride channels (picrotoxin), all produce seizures.

### GABA Relation with Sleep, Anxiety, and Stress

The inhibitory function of GABA has also been linked with the physiologic functions of sleep, anxiety, and stress. Injection of muscimol (GABA agonist) in the rostral pontine tegmentum produced marked sedation. The locus coeruleus located in the pons near the floor of the fourth ventricle has been closely associated with both sleep and anxiety: This noradrenergic center is associated with numerous GABA receptors. Hence, there is an anatomic basis for the finding that iontophoretically applied GABA decreased locus coeruleus unit firing: Further support for a GABA modulating role in sleep and anxiety is the finding that picrotoxin, a GABA antagonist, reverses GABA suppression of the locus coeruleus.

### Close Relationship of GABA and the Benzodiazepines

Because of the close association of the clinical effects of the benzodiazepines and the effects of GABA in the CNS, investigators began searching for an association of these compounds and GABA. In the mid-1970s it was shown that the benzodiazepines facilitated GABAergic transmission. The benzodiazepines were found to increase the frequency of single chloride channel opening in response to a given concentration of GABA. This in effect results in an enhanced inhibitory effect for a given concentration of GABA. The development of specific radioligand techniques demonstrated that the benzodiazepines produce their pharmacologic effects by reacting with specific membrane receptors. In fact, the pharmacologic potency for the benzodiazepine is directly correlated to its affinity for the benzodiazepine (BDZ) receptor. In addition, there is a significant correlation between a benzodiazepine's BDZ receptor affinity and its ability to inhibit convulsions produced by pentylenetetrazole. Autoradiographic studies revealed that the BDZ receptors are primarily located on the synaptosomal membrane in close association with GABA receptors. Furthermore, the distribution of BDZ receptors in the CNS and GABA receptors, although not 1:1, are very similar. One group of investigators showed that while the binding of [3H]diazepam was approximately equal in the molecular and granular layers of the cerebellum, [3H]muscimol (a GABA agonist) binding was four times greater in the granular layer than in the molecular layer. Thus there is close association, but not complete overlap between the two receptors. It is now generally accepted that the BDZ receptors and the GABA receptors reside, at least in part, if not in identical membrane proteins at least on a supramolecular protein complex. In addition to GABA and the benzodiazepines, two other drugs have been shown to bind to this receptor protein complex, picrotoxin and barbiturates. It is believed that these binding sites modulate the affinities of each other for their respective receptors and regulate chloride ion membrane permeability. For example, benzodiazepines increase the affinity of GABA for its receptor, and GABA enhances the affinity of the BDZ receptors for its ligand. Picrotoxin and barbiturates bind to a receptor site distinct from the other two. Picrotoxin blocks GABA transmission without blocking GABA binding. Barbiturates appear to bind to the picrotoxin receptor increasing the affinity of the BDZ receptor in a chloride ion dependent fashion, as well as increasing the number of GABA binding sites.

One may conclude from these studies that the BDZ receptors are part of a pharmacologic receptor complex through which the benzodiazepines produce their pharmacologic effects. The BDZ receptors are linked in some way to GABA-mediated inhibition. It is of considerable importance to ascertain whether the benzodiazepine pharmacologic effects observed are mediated via a single receptor or via distinct receptor subtypes subserving different biological functions. If the latter were true it should be possible to develop selective anxiolytic, sedative/hypnotic, muscle relaxant, and anticonvulsant benzodiazepines

All evidence in support of a multiple BDZ subreceptor hypothesis is based upon pharmacologic drug-receptor binding studies. These studies base their conclusion on the finding that binding affinities of the benzodiazepine receptors differ in various parts of the brain. One study reported the existence of a BDZ receptor (type 1) which has a binding affinity in the nanomolar range (10^-8). This receptor is associated with the ability of the benzodiazepines to block pentylenetetrazole induced seizures, act as centrally acting muscle relaxants and impair coordination as measured in the rotorod test. Another receptor (type II) has an affinity for benzodiazepines in the micromolar range (10^-6). This receptor has been correlated with the ability of the benzodiazepines to inhibit seizures induced by electric shock. Another study showed that B CCE, in contrast to the benzodiazepines, does not interact like a simple competitive inhibitor on a single class of BDZ receptors. This suggests heterogeneity of receptors. In addition, hippocampal BDZ receptor binding differs from cerebellar binding in the displacement potency of B CCE for [^3H]flunitrazepam. The IC50 value for B CCE, which is the concentration that displaces 50% of specific [^3H]flunitrazepam binding, is 7 times less than that required to displace [^3H]flunitrazepam from hippocampal receptors. This again suggests that more than one receptor type exists.

The beta carboline-3-carboxylates are another group of compounds which have been shown to antagonize the effects of traditional benzodiazepine agonists. The methyl-, ethyl-, and propyl- esters (B CCM, B CCE, B CCP), the methylamide (B CCMA), and 6,7-dimethoxy-4-ethyl beta carboline-3-carboxylate (DMCM) have been shown to have high affinity for the BDZ receptors, and antagonize benzodiazepine effects in vivo. Many of these compounds have pharmacologic effects of their own in contrast to RO 15-1788. B CCE produces proconvulsant activity while DMCM, and B CCM are convulsants. B CCMA induces anxiety attacks in humans, and B CCE produces fear and anxiety in monkeys. As one would expect, convulsions produced by DMCM are inhibited by administration of a benzodiazepine agonist-like diazepam or lorazepam, or a barbiturate-like phenobarbital. However, it was unexpected that prior administration of RO 15-1788, the so-called pure benzodiazepine antagonist, would inhibit convulsions induced by DMCM. Furthermore, B CCE if given prior to DMCM also inhibits convulsions produced by DMCM. B CCE not only fails to antagonize convulsions induced by pentylenetetrazole, picrotoxin, bicuculline and strychnine (glycine antagonist), but actually has proconvulsant activity by enhancing the effects of these convulsive drugs. The fact that both B CCE and RO 15-1788 bind to BDZ receptors suggests that the convulsive effect of DMCM is achieved by binding the same receptor. Another possibility is that there are at least two receptor subtypes, one of which is involved in the convulsive effects.

Braestrup and Nielsen performed experiments to prove that multiple benzodiazepine receptors exist in the hippocampus, in contrast to those of the cerebellum exhibit true negative cooperativity: Depending on the method used to isolate and solubilize receptors, molecular weights of these receptors vary from 50,000 to 110,000, which suggests the presence of dimers or tetramers. Therefore, receptors composed of polymer subunits in the hippocampus might possess mutually interacting sites so that binding of B CCE, but not a benzodiazepine, to the site decreases the affinity of the adjacent receptor site for other ligands (negative cooperativity). the CNS. In these studies they showed that the dissociation rate of [3H] flunitrazepam from hippocampal binding sites was not dependent on receptor occupancy by B CCE which would be expected if negative cooperativity were operative. Hofstee analysis of the inhibition of [3H]B CCP (a specific ligand for the cerebellar BDZ type I receptors) binding in the hippocampus by diazepam yielded no sign of negative cooperativity. It also showed that only a single receptor-type population was present. Scatchard analysis of [3H]B CCP binding in the presence of diazepam shows pure competitive inhibition. There were no signs of mixed type of inhibition which would be necessary if negative cooperativity were present. Finally, although these experiments were performed in rats, similar results were obtained in other species.

Evidence in Support of a Single Receptor with Multiple Conformations

Despite the fact that the preponderance of evidence supports a multiple BDZ receptor hypothesis, it has not ruled out the possibility that in fact we are dealing with a single receptor with multiple conformations. If we define a receptor as possessing a unique primary chemical structure, by definition multiple receptors must have different primary chemical structures. Therefore, receptor subtypes cannot freely interconvert from one subtype to another. However, an individual receptor may have several binding sites for different ligands. These recognition sites may not depend solely on the primary structure of the receptor, but also on the tertiary and quaternary structure. These may change from moment to moment in response to factors such as pH and temperature, occupation, or association with various ligands or other effector units. Furthermore, the majority of studies suggesting multiplicity of receptor subtypes are based on pharmacologic analysis rather than physical or chemical analysis. All these studies base their results on the existence of at least two receptor sites in interpreting Scatchard analysis and explaining Hill coefficients less than unity in displacement analysis. These investigators made the assumption that the interaction of any individual BDZ receptor with any ligand follows a simple bimolecular process and is competitive for all ligands. This assumption appears to be incorrect. The association curve for flunitrazepam (FNP) binding to BDZ synaptosomal receptors rather than being linear, as would be expected, is curvilinear and the association rate increases with increasing concentrations of ligand. The association curve is resolved best as two linear exponentials representing a fast and a slow component. These results are inconsistent with a simple bimolecular association mechanism. Similarly, biphasic curves are obtained when dissociation is initiated by adding a competitive ligand, again demonstrating a slow and fast component.

Furthermore, the rate constants for dissociation increase with competitive ligand concentration. The dissociation of the ligand-receptor complexes is faster when the experiment is performed at 0°C than at 37°C. This suggests that incubation at 37°C favors the formation of more stable (high affinity) complexes which dissociate more slowly. One can explain the above observations based on the hypothesis that two receptors exist each with different affinities for the [3H]FNP ligand. However, [3H]FNP binds to both receptors without any lag and proceeds quickly to equilibrium. One would expect that it would bind preferentially to the receptor with high affinity at the beginning of the association, and then as the reaction proceeds bind more to the low affinity receptor as the high affinity sites are saturated. If this were true, the dissociation of these complexes would be slower at pre-equilibrium (more high affinity binding than low) than that at the equilibrium state. Exactly the opposite results were obtained, which argues against a simple two receptor binding model. Furthermore, the increase in the proportion of the slow dissociation phase with no change in dissociation rate constant when incubation at 37°C is performed, indicates a time- and temperature-dependent conformational change of low affinity binding sites, or complexes, to high affinity sites or complexes. This implies that the receptor sites are interchangeable; that is, they are not distinct and immutable. Similar results were independently obtained by Doble et al.

The strongest evidence in support of the BDZ receptor heterogeneity is derived from studies demonstrating selectivity of binding of brain BDZ receptors with compounds belonging to the triazolopyridazine (CL 218872) and the beta carboline-3-carboxylate (B CCP). However, all these studies were done at 0-4°C. The question arises whether the differential affinity of these ligands for the so-called type I or type II BDZ receptors is not in fact a thermodynamic manifestation of the 0-4°C incubation condition and hence an artifact of the experimental conditions. Gee et al. investigated the influence of temperature on the differential binding characteristics of these ligands. These authors report that Hill coefficients for displacement of the beta carboline-3-carboxylates and the triazolopyridazine CL 218872 with [3H]FNP approached unity as the temperature of the assay medium approached 37°C. Hill coefficients well below unity is precisely the evidence proponents of the multiple receptor hypothesis seek. Hill coefficients at or near unity at 37°C implies that these receptor subtypes have identical recognition properties at physiologic temperatures.

Another indication for a cyclic model of interaction between benzodiazepine ligands and two interconvertible conformations of the receptor is provided by thermodynamic studies. Comparison of BDZ receptor binding of the pure antagonist RO 15-1788 and an agonist such as clonazepam shows different binding characteristics. ence of Gibbs free energy characteristics at various temperatures. The Vantt Hoff plot, from which enthalpy (AH) is calculated, shows an inclination point at 21PC for [3H]clonazepam binding; but not for RO 15-1788. Above 21°C [3H]clonazepam (or other agonist) binding was associated with a large decrease in enthalpy. In order to continue the reaction, this change is compensated for by an unfavorable decrease in entropy (AS): These findings agree with a two-step model of receptor binding. There is a conformational conversion of the BDZ receptor from a low affinity state to a high affinity state due to temperature change. Furthermore, the fact that RO 15-1788 did not show this inclination change in the Van't Hoff plot suggests that this conformational change can also be ligand induced. This is further evidence indicating that different conformations of a single receptor are involved and that different ligands or temperatures determine the conformation of the receptor ligand complex.

Similar conclusions were implied in kinetic studies of BDZ receptor ligand binding. As expected, [3H]RO 15-1788 binds to the same receptor as the agonists diazepam and FNP. However, the addition of GABA, pentobarbital, or setting the assay temperature to 37°C, all known to increase the binding affinity of agonists for the BDZ receptor, has no effect on RO 15-1788 binding. This indicates that GABA, pentobarbital, or 37°C temperature, favor the isomerization of the BDZ receptor to the high affinity state by providing the energy for the conformational change. The fact that no effect is observed in the binding affinity of RO 15-1788 indicates that the change is provided by the binding reaction. The fact that dissociation of [3H]RO 15-1788 is faster at pre-equilibrium than at equilibrium (the same as observed for the traditional agonists) suggests that binding of RO 15-1788 is to the low affinity conformation of the BDZ receptor. The ligand receptor complex is then converted to the high affinity state which accounts for the slower dissociation observed at equilibrium than at pre-equilibrium.

Hypothetical Model of the Benzodiazepine Receptor

It is quite apparent from the preceding discussion that it is impossible on the basis of pharmacologic, kinetic and thermodynamic studies to prove either hypothesis of BDZ receptor ligand interactions. In order to do this it is necessary to develop a better understanding of the molecular structure of the BDZ receptor and the mechanisms of BDZ receptor-ligand interactions. Recently, the three-dimensional structure of the acetylcholine nicotinic receptor and some of its functional subunits have been discovered. It has been shown that the acetylcholine receptor binding characteristics are very similar to the BDZ receptor characteristics.

It is now well established that the acetylcholine (ACh) receptor consists of glycoprotein. The monomeric form of the receptor has a molecular weight of 250,000 and has two ACh recognition sites. The protein consists of four alpha helical subunits: alpha, beta, gamma, and delta. The molecular weight of each of these subunits is alpha=50,000, beta=54,000, gamma=56,000, and delta=58,000. The subunits are perpendicular to the membrane plane and are arranged in a rosette around a central pore or pit in the stoichiometry alpha2, beta, gamma, delta. The complete amino acid sequence of each of the alpha helical subunits, and its arrangement in the rosette have been determined. Each alpha helix spans the membrane lipid bilayer and is approximately 110 Å in length, extending 50 Å into the extracellular fluid and 15 Å into the cytoplasm. Monomers can associate into dimers, etc., by forming disulfide bond links between the beta subunits or the delta subunits of each monomer. The alpha subunits serve as the recognition sites for both agonist and competitive antagonist ligands. Since each monomer contains two alpha subunits, two binding sites are present on each monomer.

The ACh receptor has three functional states: (1) the resting state, in which the affinity for agonists is relatively low and the sodium channel is closed, (2) the active state in which the ACh-binding sites are both occupied by agonist and the sodium channel is open, and (3) the desensitized state, in which the affinity for the agonist is relatively high but binding of agonist does not lead to sodium channel opening. On binding two molecules of agonist, the receptor undergoes rapid transition (on a submillisecond time scale) from the resting state, sodium channels closed, to the active state, channel pores open. The receptor remains in the open state for a period of milliseconds. It then reverts to the resting state if the agonist dissociates from the receptor under the influence of acetylcholine esterase, or it converts to the desensitized state if the agonist remains bound to the receptor. The time course of the latter reaction is in seconds rather than milliseconds as in the former.

Fig. 1 - Proposed Structure of Acetylcholine Receptor Showing Cross-section of a Helices Around Central Pore This is analogous to the BDZ receptor, although the BDZ receptor appears to be considerably more complex. The BDZ receptor likewise demonstrates low affinity on resting, transitional, or active states, and high affinity on desensitized states. The transitional or active state is only achieved when agonist binding occurs, and like the ACh receptor, only lasts a few milliseconds before converting to the desensitized, high affinity state, if the agonist remains bound to the receptor. The striking similarities to the BDZ receptor kinetics and thermodynamics suggests that the BDZ receptor structure may be similar. It is believed the ligand-induced conformational changes determine the pharmacologic effects observed: In the case of the BDZ receptor three classes of ligand have been identified: (1) the traditional agonist, (2) the antagonist; and (3) the inverse agonist. Based on this, the following model of BDZ receptor-ligand interactions has been proposed. First, binding of GABA to its receptor, which appears to be distinct from the BDZ receptor, results in chloride ion channel opening analogous to ACh receptor. The traditional benzodiazepine agonist in binding to the BDZ receptor induces a conformational change which is coupled in some way (i.e., dimer, tetramer, etc.) to the GABA receptor, increasing its affinity for GABA. The antagonist RO 15-1788 fixes the BDZ receptor in the desensitized state without first transforming the receptor to the active state and prevents other ligands from binding to the BDZ receptor. The coupling transformation of the GABA receptor is, therefore, prevented and no pharmacologic effect is observed. Finally, the inverse agonist (i.e., DMCM and B CCP) induces a conformational change in the BDZ receptor.

Chloride Channel

Fig. 2 - Simplified model of the benzodiazepine receptor (BDZ), GABA receptor, and chloride channel supramolecular complex. Binding of GABA to its receptor produces a conformational change which is coupled to the chloride channel protein subunits resulting in opening of the chloride channels. Chloride ion (Cl-) is able to flow down its electrochemical gradient inhibiting the postsynaptic neuron. Binding of a benzodiazepine agonist to the BDZ receptor produces a conformational change in the GABA receptor increasing the binding affinity for its ligand, thereby increasing the inhibitory effect of a given concentration of GABA. Conversely, binding of an inverse agonist to the BDZ receptor reduces the coupling reaction of the GABA to the chloride channel protein subunits decreasing the inhibitory effect of a given concentration of GABA.

which is diametrically opposite to that produced by the traditional agonists. This results in a coupling reaction with the GABA receptor chloride channel complex closing the pore, thereby producing the opposite pharmacologic effects. It must be pointed out that this is a hypothetical model. Much data remains to be collected elucidating the structural and functional characteristics of the BDZ-GABA receptor complex before a basic understanding is achieved. 19. Olsen RW: GABA-BDZ-Barbiturate receptor interaction. Neurochem 37:1-13, 1981
Interaction of convulsive ligands with benzodiazepine receptors. Science 216:1241-1243, 1982.
20. Guidotti A, Toffano G, Costa E: An endogenous protein modulates the affinity of GABA and BDZ receptors in rat brain. Nature 275:553-555, 1978.
21. Marangoa PJ and Martino AM: Studies on the Relationship of GABA stimulated diazepam binding and the GABA receptor. Mol Pharmacol 20:16-21, 1981.
22. Gavish M and Snyder SH: Soluble benzodiazepine receptors. GABAergic regulation. Nature 274:378-382, 1978.
23. Tallman JF, Thomas JW, Gallager DW: GABAergic modulation of BDZ binding site sensitivity. Nature 274:383-385, 1978.
24. Olsen RW, Ticker MK, Miller T: Dehydro picrotoxinin binding to crayfish muscle sites probably related to GABA receptor ionophores. Mol Pharmacol 14:381-390, 1978.
25. Olsen RW, Ticker MK, Van Ness PC: Effect of drugs on GABA receptors uptake, release, and synthesis in vitro. Brain Res 139:277-294, 1978.
26. Hunt WA: The effect of ethanol on GABAergic transmission. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 7:87-95, 1982.
27. Mohler H, and Richards JG: Agonist and antagonist benzodiazepine receptor interaction in vitro. Nature 294:763-765, 1981.
28. O'Brien RA, Schlosser W, Spirt NW, Franco S, Horst WD, Polc P, Bonetti EP: Antagonism of benzodiazepine receptors by beta carbolines. Life Sci 29:75-82, 1981.
29. Czernik AJ, Petrach B, Kalinsky HJ, Psychoyos S, Cash WD, Tsai C, Rinehart RK, Grant FR, Lovell RA, Brundish DE, Wade R: CGS 8261 receptor binding characteristics of a potent benzodiazepine antagonist: Life Sci 30:363-372, 1982.
30. Bonetti EP, Pieri L, Cumin R, Schnaffner R, Pieri M, Ganzu ER, Muller RK, Haefely W: Benzodiazepine antagonist RO 15-1788: neurologic and behavioral effects: Psychopharmacology 78:8-18, 1982.
31. Darragh A, Scully M, Lambe R, et al: Investigations in man of the efficacy of a benzodiazepine antagonist, RO 15-1788. Lancet 2:8-10, 1982.
32. Hunkler W, Mohler H, Pieri L, Pole P, Bonetti EP, Cumin R, Schaffner R, Haefely W: Selective antagonists of benzodiazepine. Nature 290:514-516, 1981.
33. Braestrup C, Nielsen M: Urinary and brain B-carboline-3-carboxylates as potent inhibitors of brain benzodiazepine receptors: Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 77:2288-2292, 1980.
34. Braestrup C and Nielsen M: GABA reduces binding of [3H] methly B-carbolin-3-carboxylate to brain benzodiazepine receptors. Nature 294:472-474, 1981.
35. Richards JG and Mohler H: Benzodiazepine receptors. Neuropharmacology 23:233-242, 1984. 