# Cognitive Behavioral Treatment of Insomnia

Chronic insomnia (symptoms for 6 months) is the most common sleep disorder, affecting 6% to 10% of adults in the general population, with even higher rates in patients with comorbid conditions (eg, hypertension, 44%; cardiac disease, 44.1%; breathing problems, 41.5%). Traditionally, chronic insomnia occurring with another condition has been considered secondary and rarely received direct treatment because treatment of the primary condition was expected to improve the insomnia. However, this approach often failed because chronic insomnia is maintained by behaviors, cognitions, and associations that patients adopt as they attempt to cope with poor sleep but that end up backfiring (eg, increasing caffeine, spending more time in bed, trying harder to sleep). Cognitive behavioral treatment of insomnia (CBTi) targets those behaviors, cognitions, and associations and is effective across a variety of populations, including those with medical and psychologic comorbidities. Thus, in 2005, a National Institutes of Health expert consensus panel on chronic insomnia recommended dropping the term "secondary insomnia" in favor of the term "comorbid insomnia." Because CBTi does not carry the risks associated with some sleep medications (eg, dependency, polypharmacy, cognitive and psychomotor impairment), it is an attractive option for patients with other conditions. Through the Society of Behavioral Sleep Medicine and the American Board of Sleep Medicine, it is possible to find practitioners with expertise in CBTi (as well as other aspects of behavioral sleep medicine) and other behavioral sleep resources. Given the currently limited number of trained practitioners, exploration of alternative delivery methods (eg, briefer protocols, self-help, Internet) to improve access to this highly effective treatment and expanded training in these treatments are warranted.

Abbreviations: CBTi 5 cognitive behavioral treatment of insomnia; ICD 5 implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; NIH 5 National Institutes of Health; SDB 5 sleep-disordered breathing

Insomnia is defined as complaints of difficulty initiating sleep, maintaining sleep, waking too early, and nonrestorative sleep despite adequate opportunity plus a complaint of impaired daytime functioning (eg, fatigue, depressed mood, poor concentration). Acute insomnia lasts <4 weeks and can be linked to a specific cause, whereas chronic insomnia lasts for at least 6 months and may not have an easily identifiable cause. Instead, chronic insomnia is believed to be perpetuated over time by changes in behaviors, cognitions, and associations that patients make as they attempt to compensate for poor sleep. Comorbid insomnia accounts for the majority of chronic insomnia cases. Thus, this review focuses on comorbid chronic insomnia with special emphasis on medical comorbidities (hypertension, cardiac disease, and breathing disorders).

## Prevalence

General estimates vary depending on the criteria used to define insomnia, and prevalence rates tend to decrease as the stringency of the criteria increases. Thirty percent of adults have insomnia when defined as reporting at least one insomnia symptom. daytime impairment or distress is a required criterion,                       Lichstein in 2004. Some of the data generated by
prevalence drops to 10%. When the most stringent                             diagnostic criteria are applied, prevalence remains
substantial, but further drops to about 6% of adults. The few studies examining racial differences in prev-                          prevalence have reported rates of 16.4% to 28.3% in                                whites, 15.3% to 23.7% in blacks, and 13.4% to 17.1%                           in Hispanics. When separated into age categories,                             blacks appear to have a greater prevalence of insom-                           nia in middle age (30-59 years), whereas whites have                           a greater prevalence of insomnia across the life span                          (Table 1). Overall, sex, age, and health and mental                          conditions appear to be the most significant risk fac-                        tors for insomnia. Older age has been associated                          with increased risk of insomnia. However, research                        suggests that age itself is not the risk; instead, the risk                   is related to inactivity, sleep changes, decreased social
activities, and increases in health conditions associ-                                                     ated with aging. Women are at least two times
more likely to have insomnia than age-matched men, and an increased prevalence of insomnia has been                               seen in adolescent girls compared with age-matched                             boys (Table 1). The presence of a health or mental                           condition increases the risk, with insomnia seen in                           37.8% of individuals with a comorbid condition but                            in only 8.4% of those without a comorbid condition.                         Thus, treatment focused on the primary diagnosis, and it was assumed
Although there are numerous epidemiologic studies                              of insomnia, criteria for insomnia classification are                          highly varied among these studies. Therefore, the sum-                         mary of prevalence data in Table 1 relies heavily on                           data collected from a single epidemiologic study by                            depression does not result in remission of insomnia.

Table 1—Prevalence of Insomnia by Sex, Age, Race, Health Condition, and Mental Disorder

| Grouping                                                 | Men   | Women | Blacks | Whites | All   |
|---------------------------------------------------------|-------|-------|--------|--------|-------|
| Age                                                    |       |       |        |        |       |
| Adolescents (13-16 y; n 5 1,014)                      | 8.9   | 12.4  | …      | …      | …     |
| 20-29 y (n 5 772)                                     | 6.0   | 12.0  | 2.4    | 9.8    | …     |
| 30-39 y (n 5 772)                                     |       |       |        |        | …     |
| 40-49 y (n 5 772)                                     | 22.0  | 11.0  | 12.0   | 20.0   | 23.4  |
| 50-59 y (n 5 772)                                     | 10.0  | 21.0  | 17.0   | 21.9   | 11.1  |
| 60-69 y (n 5 772)                                     | 9.0   | 21.0  | 13.1   | 13.9   | …     |
| 70-79 y (n 5 772)                                     | 23.0  | 26.0  | 18.8   | 25.3   | …     |
| 80-89 1 y (n 5 772)                                   | 23.0  | 41.0  | 22.2   | 35.1   | …     |
| Health condition                                       |       |       |        |        |       |
| Hypertension (n 5 772)                                | …     | …     | …      | …      | 44    |
| Cancer (n 5 772)                                      | …     | …     | …      | …      | 41.4  |
| Heart disease (n 5 772)                               | …     | …     | …      | …      | 44.1  |
| Diabetes (n 5 772)                                    | …     | …     | …      | …      | 47.4  |
| Chronic pain (n 5 772)                                | …     | …     | …      | …      | 48.6  |
| Breathing problems (n 5 772)                          | …     | …     | …      | …      | 59.6  |
| Urinary problems (n 5 772)                            | …     | …     | …      | …      | 41.5  |
| GI problems (n 5 772)                                 | …     | …     | …      | …      | 55.4  |
| Sleep-disordered breathing (n 5 225)                  | …     | …     | …      | …      | 54.9  |
| Neurologic disorders (n 5 772)                        | …     | …     | …      | …      | 7.3   |
| Mental disorder                                         |       |       |        |        |       |
| Depressive (n 5 14,915)                               | …     | …     | …      | …      | 64.6  |
| Anxiety (n 5 14,915)                                  | …     | …     | …      | …      | 43.6  | However, there is a critical need for additional research on the effects of nonsleep interventions across the variety of presenting comorbid conditions. Prevalence studies have estimated that secondary insomnia accounts for up to 90% of insomnia cases. The NIH conference recommended that the term “secondary” be dropped in favor of the term “comorbid.” This recommendation was made for several reasons. First, when insomnia co-occurs with another condition, it can be difficult to establish which condition is causing the other. Additionally, the relationship between insomnia and some conditions is likely reciprocal in nature (eg, pain contributes to poor sleep and vice versa). Second, the factors that perpetuate insomnia over time often are different from those that precipitated it in the first place. For example, poor sleep may begin in response to cardiac disease but is maintained over time by the behaviors (increased caffeine use) and thought patterns (worrying about one’s ability to get a good night’s sleep) that patients develop in an attempt to cope with their sleep difficulties. Finally, when insomnia is conceptualized as secondary, it is unlikely to receive direct treatment. This is unfortunate because effective treatment of chronic insomnia often requires direct intervention to correct the behaviors, thought patterns, and associations that maintain it.

### Spielman 3-P Model of Insomnia

The most commonly used model in understanding the development of chronic insomnia includes predisposing conditions, precipitating circumstances, and perpetuating factors (3-P model). In this theoretical model, predisposing conditions do not produce chronic insomnia but precede its onset and increase the likelihood for its occurrence. For example, anxiousness personality traits may result in hyper-arousal, predisposing a person to sleep problems.

Precipitating circumstances co-occur with the onset of acute insomnia (eg, stressful personal events, declines in health). According to this theory, insomnia is maintained by perpetuating factors, which include the changes in daytime behaviors, cognitions, or sleep/wake schedules that patients adopt to compensate for poor sleep. The development of chronic insomnia is conceptualized as related to a combination of predisposing (anxious personality type) and precipitating factors (eg, cardiac disease). However, over time, a positive feedback loop of perpetuating factors (eg, compensatory behaviors, cognitions) may develop that maintain or even exacerbate the sleep problem. Predisposing and precipitating factors of insomnia decline as the perpetuating factors exert a more direct impact on a nightly basis. These perpetuating factors are the targets of cognitive behavioral treatment of insomnia (CBTi), which, as will be discussed later, has extensive empirical support. Less well researched is the direct relationship of the 3-P model in the development and maintenance of insomnia.

### Perpetuating Factors

#### Behaviors
Compensatory changes in behavior, such as daytime naps, excessive time in bed, and consuming stimulants, maintain insomnia over the long term. Specifically, daytime naps may meet some of a patient’s sleep needs and as a result, disrupt the natural daytime increase in the homeostatic sleep drive. As a result, the patient’s drive for sleep is weakened, and he or she may take longer to fall asleep that night. Stimulants (eg, caffeine, nicotine) act on the CNS and reduce sleep drive. Reduced daytime activity among patients with chronic illness could lead to a number of potential consequences, including modification of the circadian rhythm due to reduced light exposure and increased opportunity for napping with increased time in bed. However, the role of daytime activity in insomnia needs more extensive research.

#### Associations
As patients experience sleep problems over time, they may begin to associate bed, bedtime, and the bedroom environment with difficulty falling asleep. After repeated negative experiences, the bed and bedroom become cues for arousal rather than sleep. Spending an excessive amount of wakeful time in bed (during the night, while attempting to sleep in during the morning, or during the day) is a common response to poor sleep. Intuitively, this makes sense, but unfortunately, it may backfire because the additional wake time strengthens the association between the bed/bedroom and wakefulness, anxiety, and frustration. Cognitions
Cognitive distortions related to sleep are related to elevated emotional arousal and worsening sleep problems. Negative beliefs, attitudes, and interpretations related to sleep problems exacerbate and maintain insomnia by stimulating the sympathetic nervous system and increasing arousal. Worries about sleep, physical health, or other stressors may increase both cognitive and physiologic arousal.

Chronic Comorbid Insomnia
As mentioned previously, chronic insomnia is commonly comorbid with other conditions. Comorbidity between chronic insomnia and depression or anxiety is high, and insomnia is a risk factor for both. Controlling for psychologic disorders and other sleep disorders, chronic insomnia is also highly comorbid with most major medical conditions (Table 1). This review focuses on chronic insomnia comorbid with hypertension, cardiovascular events, and sleep-disordered breathing (SDB). The literature pertaining to insomnia in these specific medical conditions is limited but does indicate an increased rate of insomnia among these conditions when compared with the general population.

Hypertension and Cardiovascular Disease
Comorbidity between insomnia and hypertension ranges from 25% to 44%, depending on the measurement tools and definitions used. Table 2 summarizes the data of recent epidemiologic studies on the interaction among hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and insomnia. Schwartz and colleagues and, more recently, Spiegelhalder and colleagues conducted reviews of the literature. Unfortunately, the studies to date have used a wide range of definitions from unvalidated questionnaires that assessed sleep complaint and not daytime complaints, which are necessary for an insomnia diagnosis. Thus, it is difficult to determine the true rates of insomnia among patients with hypertension and cardiovascular disease. Consistently sleeping < 6 h a night is associated with an increased risk for hypertension. Although some research suggests that insomnia does not increase mortality risk, other data indicate that increased frequency of insomnia symptoms is associated with an increased risk for all-cause mortality and cardiovascular events. Frequent difficulty in initiating and maintaining sleep may be related to increased risk for acute myocardial infarction and coronary cardiovascular disease-related death. The biologic mechanisms for this link remain uncertain but may be related to increased sympathetic nervous system activity or increased inflammatory activity in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Patients with implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) devices also show clinically significant levels of sleep disruption. Patients with ICDs are at an increased risk for clinically significant anxiety, which is related to hypervigilance, shock anxiety, and fear of device malfunction, placing these patients at increased risk for insomnia.

Sleep-Disordered Breathing
SDB disorders are highly comorbid with insomnia, with prevalence estimates ranging from 22% to 54.9%. As with cardiovascular disease, the wide range in prevalence rates of comorbid insomnia and SDB is likely related to the diversity of definitions and measurement tools used. For a review of the prevalence and interaction of comorbid insomnia and SDB, see Al-Jawder and BaHammam. SDB is most often related to increased rates of sleep maintenance insomnia, and higher apnea-hypopnea indices are risk factors for sleep maintenance problems. Older adults with insomnia, patients with long-term medication-resistant insomnia, and women with insomnia have elevated rates of comorbid SDB, highlighting the importance of polysomnographic screening for patients with insomnia and symptoms of SDB. The overlap between the conditions may render identification of SDB in these patients more difficult for the nonsleep specialist. Despite a lack of empirical links between SDB and insomnia, possible mechanisms include increased nighttime awakenings due to nocturia, sleep fragmentation due to oxygen desaturation-related arousals, and decreased neck and throat muscle tone due to sleep deprivation.

Assessment
The standard assessment of insomnia should include a thorough review of current insomnia symptoms, including nighttime complaints and daytime consequences (Table 3). A sleep history should be taken to identify other conditions that may lead to poor sleep, such as psychologic factors, other sleep disorders, substance abuse, and current medications. Anxiety and depression are common in the context of chronic insomnia but do not necessarily preclude the separate treatment of insomnia symptoms because significant improvements in insomnia have been found without direct treatment of mood symptoms. The use of sleep diaries is essential for documenting sleep/wake patterns and tailoring treatments to the patient’s symptoms. Although assessment tools for documenting sleep quality and symptom severity exist, none are independently adequate for making a differential diagnosis. The use of actigraphy Table 2—Prevalence and Symptoms of Insomnia in Hypertension and Cardiovascular Disease

| Authors/Year                | Insomnia Definition                                   | Measures                                   | Sample                                          | Results                                                                                     |
|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Taylor et al /2007          | Research diagnostic criteria for chronic insomnia    | Sleep diary for 14 d; health survey      | 772 community-dwelling individuals in Tennessee | Hypertension: 44% met criteria for insomnia; 43% of patients with insomnia had hypertension. Heart disease: 44% met criteria for insomnia; 22% of patients with insomnia had heart disease. |
| Redeker et al /2010         | Difficulty initiating and maintaining sleep or waking too early; frequency of problem often or almost always | Sleep Habits Questionnaire; Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index | 173 patients with stable heart failure from the northeastern United States. Mean age, 60.3 y; 65% men | Fifty-one percent of sample met insomnia definition (47% maintaining sleep, 42% falling asleep, 24% waking too early). No effect of demographic or medical characteristics was found. |
| Cross et al /2010           | Not defined                                         | Actigraphy; self-report diary             | 30 patients with ICDs; 30 patients with CAD. Mean age, 66.9 y; 61.5% men | Both groups had an average of .31 min of self-report sleep onset latency; patients with ICDs averaged .31 min of self-report wake after sleep onset. Both groups had an average of .31 min of actigraphic wake after sleep onset; patients with CAD averaged .31 min on actigraphic sleep onset latency. |
| Budhiraja et al /2011       | DSM-IV criteria for insomnia                        | Self-report sleep questionnaire; polysomnography | 3,247 community-dwelling adults in Michigan with a variety of comorbid medical conditions. Mean age, 41.7 y; 49.2% men | Hypertension: 24.7% met criteria for insomnia; 42.4% had a sleep efficiency, 25th percentile of healthy individuals. Heart disease: 26.8% met criteria for insomnia; 62.8% had a sleep efficiency, 25th percentile of healthy individuals. |

CAD = coronary artery disease; DSM-IV = Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition; ICD = implantable cardioverter-defibrillator.

(wrist-worn activity monitoring) is not a standard assessment tool for insomnia but can be a useful complement to sleep diaries, particularly when circadian rhythm disorders are suspected. Polysomnography and multiple sleep latency testing use electrophysiological measurement of neurologic and muscular activity and are standard assessments for SDB and narcolepsy. These tests are not recommended in the routine assessment of insomnia but should be considered when another sleep disorder is suspected or when treatment of the insomnia is unsuccessful.

Treatment Overview

Insomnia treatments fall into two categories: pharmacologic and cognitive behavioral. Medications typically are indicated for short-term use, although CBTi may be more beneficial for chronic insomnia. Although a range of classes of medications are indicated for the treatment of insomnia (eg, sedating antidepressants, melatonin, benzodiazepine receptor agonists), there is no single reliable pharmacologic method to treat insomnia; however, hypnotic medications are the most commonly prescribed medication. Although effective for short-term use, some hypnotic medications can lose effectiveness over time while retaining the potential for dependence and rebound insomnia. More recently formulated medications retain effectiveness over a longer period; however, these drugs can still lead to tolerance, physical and psychologic dependence, and hypnotic-dependent insomnia. Nevertheless, hypnotic medications should be | Category                             | Assessments                                                                                       |
|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Recommended for                      | Review of current nighttime symptoms and daytime complaints                                      |
| all patients                         | In-depth sleep history, related medical and psychologic conditions, and current medications      |
|                                      | Sleep diaries to determine daily patterns of sleep problems                                       |
| Supplementary                        | Sleep questionnaires (eg, Epworth Sleepiness Scale, Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index)             |
| information                          | Mood questionnaires (eg, Beck Depression Inventory, State Trait Anxiety Inventory)              |
| Not recommended for                  | Actigraphy                                                                                       |
| standard assessment                  | Polysomnography (recommended when sleep-disordered breathing is suspected)                       |
| of insomnia                          | Multiple sleep latency tests (recommended when narcolepsy is suspected)                         |

Cognitive Behavioral Treatments

Sleep Education

Education regarding normative sleep practices often is helpful. In patients with an associated medical or psychologic condition, information regarding sleep disturbances is important. For example, patients with ICDs and coronary artery disease may be informed that insomnia is a highly comorbid condition. More general education would inform patients that sleep needs vary from person to person and from night to night and that taking 30 min to fall asleep or awakening for 30 min during the night is normal.

Sleep Hygiene

Sleep hygiene aims to increase behaviors and environmental conditions that promote improved quality or quantity of sleep while reducing or eliminating practices that interfere with sleep. For some behaviors, sleep hygiene recommendations may focus less on reducing and eliminating the behavior than on limiting those behaviors to certain times of the day (eg, avoiding liquids within 2 h of bedtime). There may be individual differences in sensitivity and adherence to sleep hygiene rules that need to be tailored to individuals (eg, differential sensitivity to caffeine use). Although sleep hygiene is widely prescribed, the Standards Practice Committee of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine suggests that there is insufficient evidence to conclude that it should be used as a standalone treatment.

Stimulus Control

Stimulus control therapy is based on learning theory and the underlying premise that sleep difficulties may be due to the bed and bedroom becoming conditioned cues for anxiety and arousal associated with unsuccessfully trying to fall asleep. This technique aims to strengthen the association between the bed/bedroom and sleep and to weaken the associations between the bed/bedroom and arousing activities that interfere with sleep. There are six primary instructions for stimulus control. Stimulus control has been identified as a well-established treatment of insomnia, and CBTi that includes it has been shown to be more effective in improving sleep onset latency, wake time after sleep onset, sleep efficiency (ratio of time spent asleep to time spent in bed), and slow-wave sleep than pharmacotherapy, with improvements maintained at 1-year follow-up.

| Outcome                               | Effect Size |
|---------------------------------------|-------------|
| Self-report sleep onset latency       | 0.90        |
| Objective sleep onset latency         | 0.33        |
| Self-report wake after sleep onset    | 1.05        |
| Objective wake after sleep onset      | 0.46        |
| Self-report total sleep time          | 0.24        |
| Objective total sleep time            | 0.13        |
| Subjective sleep efficiency           | 0.99        |
| Objective sleep efficiency             | 0.44        |
| Mood (depression, anxiety)            | 2.31        | | Authors/Year                          | Study Design                                   | Study Sample                                   | Intervention                                   | Outcome                                                                                     |
|---------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| SDBKrakow et al59/2004                | Assessed sequential CBTi and SDB therapy in patients with concurrent chronic insomnia and SDB | 17 patients (mean age, 42.9 y) with psychophysiologic insomnia who completed CBTi (but did not fully respond to therapy) and received a diagnosis of SDB after CBTi completion | Sequential CBTi and CPAP therapy (following CBTi, PSG was conducted to confirm SDB and titrate CPAP; SDB treatment of 3 mo) | Eight of 17 participants had nonclinical insomnia levels post-CBTi. Fifteen of 17 participants reached nonclinical insomnia levels post-SDB treatment. |
| Guilleminault et al60 /2008           | Evaluated subjective and objective outcomes of different sequences of two treatments for OSA: surgical intervention and CBTi | 30 patients (mean age, 31.8 y [surgical intervention]; 30.9 y [CBTi]) with both insomnia and OSA | Participants randomized to one of two groups: (1) CBTi followed by surgical intervention or (2) surgical intervention followed by CBTi | Surgical intervention alone eliminated insomnia complaint in five of 15 patients; no patients receiving CBTi alone were remitted. Surgical intervention had greater initial improvements in subjective (sleepiness, fatigue), objective (TST, slow-wave sleep, WASO), and respiratory measures (AHI, RDI, Spo2). |
| COPDKapella et al61 /2011             | Evaluated effectiveness of CBTi in patients with comorbid insomnia and COPD | 23 patients (mean age, 65 y [CBTi]; 60 y [WE]) with COPD and concurrent insomnia symptoms (difficulty either initiating or maintaining sleep) | Participants randomized to one of two groups: (1) six weekly CBTi sessions or (2) six weekly WE sessions | After CBTi, significant improvements were observed in subjective insomnia severity, global sleep quality, SE, WASO, and attitudes about sleep. Significant improvements in depressed mood were observed after WE. |
| CADRybarczyk et al62 /2002            | Compared effectiveness of group CBTi to self-guided audio relaxation in older adults with comorbid insomnia and chronic health conditions | 35 older adults (mean age, 66.5 y [CBTi]; 65.6 y [home relaxation]; 71.4 y [control]) with comorbid chronic health conditions (either CAD, osteoarthritis, or type 2 diabetes mellitus) | Participants randomized to one of three groups: (1) eight weekly group CBTi sessions or (2) home-based audio relaxation program. Delayed treatment control (given home relaxation intervention later) | CBTi significantly improved compared with control on SE, WASO, TIB, global quality of sleep, and beliefs and attitudes about sleep at 4 mo follow-up. Home relaxation improved SE, WASO, and global sleep quality compared with control at 4-mo follow-up. |
| Rybarczyk et al63 /2011               | Evaluated two self-help methods of CBTi with older adults with comorbid insomnia and chronic health conditions, including CHD | 106 older adults (mean age, 68 y) with insomnia and either CHD, osteoarthritis, or no health condition | Participants randomized to one of two groups: (1) CBTi book or (2) CBTi multimedia | Across both treatments, participants experienced moderate to significant clinical changes in sleep that were durable at 1-y follow-up. |

AHI 5 apnea-hypopnea index; CHD 5 coronary heart disease; OSA 5 obstructive sleep apnea; PSG 5 polysomnography; RDI 5 respiratory disturbance index; SDB 5 sleep-disordered breathing; SE 5 sleep efficiency; Spo2 5 oxygen saturation as measured by pulse oximetry; TIB 5 time in bed; TST 5 total sleep time; WASO 5 wake after sleep onset; WE 5 wellness education.

Sleep Restriction and Sleep Compression

Sleep restriction and sleep compression both focus on reducing the amount of time a patient spends awake in bed during the night by prescribing a time in bed that more closely resembles the actual amount of time the patient spends sleeping. The primary distinction between these two approaches is how quickly the amount of time the patient currently spends in bed is reduced. Sleep restriction sharply reduces the | Activity                                                                                                           | Examples                                                                                          |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Frequent napping                                                                                                   | …                                                                                                 |
| Variable bedtimes and wake times                                                                                   | …                                                                                                 |
| Frequently spending an excessive length of time in bed                                                            | …                                                                                                 |
| Use of stimulants near bedtime                                                                                     | Alcohol, tobacco, caffeine                                                                         |
| Stimulating activities too close to bedtime                                                                        | Working, talking about stressful topics, paying bills                                             |
| Use of bed for nonsleep-related activities                                                                         | Watching television, reading, snacking                                                            |
| Poor bedroom environment                                                                                            | Uncomfortable bed, too much light or noise, too cold or too warm                                  |
| Allowing oneself to persist in sleep-preventing mental activities while in bed                                    | Thinking, planning, reminiscing                                                                    |

amount of time spent in bed, whereas sleep com-
pression takes a more gradual approach; Table 8 pro-
vides detailed instructions on how to apply both
methods. Both approaches help patients to achieve a
consolidated block of higher-quality sleep and work
by (1) weakening the association between the bed/bed-
room and being awake and (2) inducing partial
sleep deprivation that builds sleep debt and activates
the sleep drive, facilitating more-rapid sleep onset,
increased slow-wave sleep, and fewer awakenings dur-
ing the night. Following successful consolidation of
sleep time (measured by tracking sleep efficiency),
time in bed can be gradually expanded to allow for
greater sleep opportunity.
Sleep restriction has received greater research
attention and is the technique most commonly used
in CBTi protocols. Across various studies, sleep restric-
tion alone has been shown to decrease sleep onset
latency and wake time during the night as well as to
increase total sleep time and sleep efficiency.
However, sleep restriction may not be appropriate for some
patients. For example, sleep restriction is contrain-
dicated for patients with a history of mania or sei-
zures because sleep deprivation (even if it is only
mild) increases the risk for episodes. Sleep compres-
sion may also be preferred where a drastic reduction
in sleep or increase in sleep deprivation is not recom-
mended (eg, frail older adults, patients with severe
or multiple medical comorbidities, patients resistant
to sleep restriction).

A variety of relaxation techniques can be used in
the treatment of insomnia, including diaphragmatic
breathing, biofeedback, imagery, and meditation. The
goal of relaxation is to reduce the patient’s levels
of physiologic and cognitive arousal. One approach
acknowledged as an empirically supported treatment
by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine is pro-
gressive muscle relaxation. This method involves lead-
ing patients through a deep-breathing exercise followed
by alternating tensing and relaxation of muscle groups
(eg, arms, neck, back, legs) throughout the body. Patients
are instructed to pay attention to the feelings of relax-
ation after the process compared with feelings of
tension before and to practice this technique once
during the day and before bedtime. Relaxation can
also be integrated with stimulus control. Prior to leav-
ing the bed during nighttime awakenings, patients can
practice a relaxation technique (one time per awak-
ening) to see whether it helps them to fall back to
sleep. For patients with concomitant pain or joint dis-
orders, a passive relaxation procedure that does not
involve tensing and relaxing muscles, which could
exacerbate their conditions, may be preferred.

| Step | Instructions                                                                                                   |
|------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1    | Lie down to go to sleep only when you are sleepy.                                                            |
| 2    | Do not use the bed for anything except sleep and sex. Do not eat, read, watch television, or worry in bed.  |
| 3    | If you cannot fall asleep within 10 min, get up and go to another room. Only return to bed when you feel sleepy again. |
| 4    | If you return to bed and still cannot fall asleep, repeat step 3. Do this as often as necessary throughout the night. |
| 5    | Set your alarm and get up at the same time every morning regardless of how much you slept during the night. This will help your body to acquire a constant sleep rhythm. |
| 6    | Do not nap during the day.                                                                                    |

Patients with insomnia frequently express attitudes and beliefs about sleep that can prompt worry and anxiety about one’s ability to get the sleep he or she needs. This anxiety and worry contributes to arousal that interferes with sleep, which prompts further anxiety and worry and sets up a self-fulfilling cycle that is difficult to break in the absence of direct intervention. Cognitive therapy focuses on identifying these beliefs and replacing them with more-adaptive beliefs and attitudes. Sleep education assists cognitive therapy because learning about normative sleep patterns can be helpful in addressing mistaken beliefs. Although cognitive therapy has not been evaluated as a singular therapy. Table 8—Sleep Restriction and Sleep Compression Instructions

| Instructions                     | Details                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Common                           | Sleep diaries: ask patients to complete daily sleep diaries starting 1-2 wk prior to initiating treatment and throughout treatment. At a minimum, the diaries should provide daily information on TIB, TST, TWT, and SE. Avoid daytime napping. |
| Technique specific               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Sleep restriction                | Calculate average TIB and TST for the previous 1-2 wk. Determine initial TIB prescription, which is the average TIB during baseline 1 30 min. (Do not go below 5.5 h.) Work with patient to set a regular bedtime and wake time consistent with the TIB prescription. Monitor TIB prescription during each treatment session and adjust as follows: If average SE . 90%, add 30 min to averaged reported TIB. If average SE , 85%, subtract 30 min from average reported TIB. If SE is between 85% and 90%, do not adjust. Do not go to bed before set bedtime. Get out of bed at the set wake time every morning. Avoid daytime napping. |
| Sleep compression                | Calculate average TIB and TWT for the previous 1-2 wk. Divide TWT by number of proposed treatment sessions. Determine TIB prescription by reducing TIB slowly by the calculated increment above. Work with patient to set a regular bedtime and wake time consistent with the TIB prescription. Go to bed and get out of bed at set bedtime and wake time. |

for insomnia, CBTi with a specific cognitive component has been shown to improve both objectively measured sleep and subjective sleep satisfaction and to sleep-wake scheduling, early morning bright light exposure, and exercise. There is very limited literature pertaining to the treatment of insomnia in the context of comorbid medical disorders, and far more research is needed in this area. Some empirical evidence suggests that concurrent medical treatment of SDB and psychologic treatment of chronic insomnia can result in clinically significant improvements in both conditions (Table 5). However, these two studies had relatively small samples sizes and lacked true control groups. When addressing insomnia comorbid with symptoms of another psychologic disorder, it may be appropriate to pursue adjunctive treatment of both conditions, but this remains to be thoroughly investigated. Sleep-related education can specifically address common symptom patterns. Within each patient population may be specific cognitions or emotions that disrupt sleep, and addressing these specific concerns is important in tailoring cognitive treatment. For example, among patients with ICDs, concerns about receiving a shock in the middle of the night may lead to increased emotional and physiologic arousal, which can interfere with sleep.

Tailoring CBTi
For some populations, the standard CBTi recommendations should be tailored. For example, among caregivers for individuals with dementia, standard CBTi recommendations have been combined with stress management, linkage to community resources, management of problem behaviors in patients with dementia, and communication skills.

Finding a Therapist
Presently, the number of patients who could benefit from behavioral sleep treatment far exceeds the current number of certified providers. Of these certified providers, 8.6% are doctors of psychology, 26.5% are medical doctors, and 64.9% are doctors of philosophy. Increasing the number of providers | Organization                                                                                                                            | Website Address         | Website Path                                                      |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|
| American Board of Sleep Medicine                                                                                                       | www.absm.org            | Behavioral Sleep Medicine Certification Exam, Certified Behavioral Sleep Medicine Specialists |
| American Psychological Association                                                                                                       | www.apa.org             | Psychology Help Center, Find a Psychologist                      |
| Association of Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies                                                                                        | www.abct.org            | Find a Therapist                                                 |
| Society of Behavioral Sleep Medicine                                                                                                    | www.behavioralsleep.org | Find a Behavioral Sleep Medicine Provider                        |

is a major goal of the American Board of Sleep Medicine and the newly established Society of Behavioral Sleep Medicine. In the meantime, resources are available for providers who may not have sleep-specific expertise but who have expertise in related psychological and cognitive behavioral therapies. Table 9 lists resources for locating a certified behavioral sleep specialist as well as other behavioral specialists who may provide services for patients with insomnia.

Future Directions

Given that most studies examine the discrete cognitive behavioral treatments as part of a comprehensive treatment package (ie, CBTi), conducting dismantling trials to evaluate the effectiveness of the specific components of CBTi is warranted. Increased efforts to determine the optimal combination, sequence, and duration of treatments are needed to provide improved care for specific conditions (eg, medical or psychologic problems, primary insomnia). Furthermore, because of the lack of trained specialists, alternative forms of behavioral treatment delivery should be explored, including developing briefer treatments, the use of self-guided treatments, or alternative methods of treatment delivery (eg, therapy sessions delivered through the Internet or by telephone).

Summary

Comorbid insomnia accounts for the majority of chronic insomnia cases. It often requires direct treatment to address the behaviors, cognitions, and associations that patients adopt to cope with poor sleep but which backfire (eg, caffeine use, spending more time in bed, trying harder to sleep). CBTi offers effective treatment of comorbid insomnia and represents a particularly attractive treatment option because it does not carry some of the risks associated with medications (eg, dependency, polypharmacy, cognitive and psychomotor impairment). Given the currently limited number of trained practitioners, alternative methods of delivery (eg, briefer protocols, Internet, videoconferencing) should be explored to improve access to this highly effective treatment. 16. Mallon L, Broman JE, Hetta J. Relationship between insomnia, depression, and mortality: a 12-year follow-up of older adults in the community. Int Psychogeriatr. 2000 ; 12 ( 3 ): 295 - 306
17. Roth T. Insomnia: definition, prevalence, etiology, and consequences . J Clin Sleep Med. 2007 ; 3 ( suppl 5 ): S7 - S10
18. Ohayon MM, Zulley J, Guilleminault C, Smirne S, Priest RG. How age and daytime activities are related to insomnia in the general population: consequences for older people. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2001 ; 49 ( 4 ): 360 - 366
19. Hauri P, Chernik D, Hawkins D, Mendels J. Sleep of depressed patients in remission. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1974;31(3): 386 - 391
20. Ford DE, Kamerow DB. Epidemiologic study of sleep disturbances and psychiatric disorders. An opportunity for prevention? JAMA. 1989 ; 262 ( 11 ): 1479 - 1484
21. Spielman A. Assessment of insomnia . Clin Psychol Rev. 1986 ; 6 (1): 11 - 25
22. Yang CM, Lin SC, Hsu SC, Cheng CP. Maladaptive sleep hygiene practices in good sleepers and patients with insomnia . J Health Psychol. 2010 ; 15 ( 1 ): 147 - 155
23. Jefferson CD, Drake CL, Scofield HM, et al. Sleep hygiene practices in a population-based sample of insomniacs . Sleep. 2005 ; 28 ( 5 ): 611 - 615
24. McCrae CS, Rowe MA, Dautovich ND, et al. Sleep hygiene practices in two community dwelling samples of older adults . Sleep. 2006 ; 29 ( 12 ): 1551 - 1560
25. Warburton DE, Nicol CW, Bredin SS. Health benefits of physical activity: the evidence . CMAJ. 2006 ; 174 ( 6 ): 801 - 809
26. Bootzin RR. A stimulus control treatment for insomnia. Paper presented at: 80th Annual Convention of the American Psychological Association; September 2-8, 1972; Honolulu, HI
27. Belanger L, Savard J, Morin CM. Clinical management of insomnia using cognitive therapy. Behav Sleep Med. 2006;4(3):179-198
28. Morin CM, Stone J, Trinkle D, Mercer J, Remsberg S. Dysfunctional beliefs and attitudes about sleep among older adults with and without insomnia complaints . Psychol Aging. 1993 ; 8 ( 3 ): 463 - 467
29. Taylor DJ, Lichstein KL, Durrence HH, Reidel BW, Bush AJ. Epidemiology of insomnia, depression, and anxiety. Sleep. 2005 ; 28 ( 11 ): 1457 - 1464
30. Johnson EO, Roth T, Breslau N. The association of insomnia with anxiety disorders and depression: exploration of the direction of risk . J Psychiatr Res. 2006 ; 40 ( 8 ): 700 - 708
31. Neckelmann D, Mykletun A, Dahl AA. Chronic insomnia as a risk factor for developing anxiety and depression . Sleep. 2007 ; 30 ( 7 ): 873 - 880
32. Budhiraja R, Roth T, Hudgel DW, Budhiraja P, Drake CL. Prevalence and polysomnographic correlates of insomnia comorbid with medical disorders . Sleep. 2011 ; 34 ( 7 ): 859 - 867
33. Redeker NS, Jeon S, Muench U, Campbell D, Walsleben J, Rapoport DM. Insomnia symptoms and daytime function in stable heart failure . Sleep. 2010 ; 33 ( 9 ): 1210 - 1216
34. Cross NJ, McCrae CS, Smith KM, Conti JB, Sears SF. Comparison of actigraphic and subjective measures of sleep in implantable cardioverter defibrillator and coronary artery disease patients . Clin Cardiol. 2010 ; 33 ( 12 ): 753 - 759
35. Schwartz S, McDowell Anderson W, Cole SR, Cornoni-Huntley J, Hays JC, Blazer D. Insomnia and heart disease: a review of epidemiologic studies . J Psychosom Res. 1999 ; 47 ( 4 ): 313 - 333
36. Spiegelhalder K, Scholtes C, Riemann D. The association between insomnia and cardiovascular diseases . Nature and Science of Sleep. 2010 ; 2010 (2): 71 - 78
37. Gottlieb DJ, Redline S, Nieto FJ, et al. Association of usual sleep duration with hypertension: the Sleep Heart Health Study . Sleep. 2006 ; 29 ( 8 ): 1009 - 1014
38. Kripke DF, Garfinkel L, Wingard DL, Klauber MR, Marler MR. Mortality associated with sleep duration and insomnia . Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2002 ; 59 ( 2 ): 131 - 136
39. Chien KL, Chen PC, Hsu HC, et al. Habitual sleep duration and insomnia and the risk of cardiovascular events and all-cause death: report from a community-based cohort . Sleep. 2010 ; 33 ( 2 ): 177 - 184
40. Laugsand LE, Vatten LJ, Platou C, Janszky I. Insomnia and the risk of acute myocardial infarction: a population study . Circulation. 2011 ; 124 ( 19 ): 2073 - 2081
41. Vgontzas AN, Bixler EO, Lin HM, et al. Chronic insomnia is associated with nyctohemeral activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis: clinical implications . J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 ; 86 ( 8 ): 3787 - 3794
42. Spiegel K, Leproult R, Van Cauter E. Impact of sleep debt on metabolic and endocrine function . Lancet. 1999;354(9188): 1435 - 1439
43. Pedersen SS, Theuns DA, Jordaens L, Kupper N. Course of anxiety and device-related concerns in implantable cardioverter defibrillator patients the first year post implantation . Europace. 2010 ; 12 ( 8 ): 1119 - 1126
44. Camm AJ, Sears SF Jr, Todaro JF, Lewis TS, Sotile W, Conti JB. Examining the psychosocial impact of implantable cardioverter defibrillators: a literature review . Clin Cardiol. 1999; 22 ( 7 ): 481 - 489
45. Al-Jawder SE, BaHammam AS. Comorbid insomnia in sleep-related breathing disorders: an under-recognized association . Sleep Breath. 2012 ; 16 ( 2 ): 295 - 304
46. Björnsdóttir E, Janson C, Gíslason T, et al. Insomnia in untreated sleep apnea patients compared to controls . J Sleep Res. 2012 ; 21 ( 2 ): 131 - 138
47. Gold AR, Gold MS, Harris KW, Espeleta VJ, Amin MM, Broderick JE. Hypersomnolence, insomnia and the pathophysiology of upper airway resistance syndrome . Sleep Med. 2008 ; 9 ( 6 ): 675 - 683
48. Krakow B, Ulibarri VA, Romero E. Persistent insomnia in chronic hypnotic users presenting to a sleep medical center: a retrospective chart review of 137 consecutive patients . J Nerv Ment Dis. 2010 ; 198 ( 10 ): 734 - 741
49. Chesson AJr, Hartse K, Anderson WM, et al; Standards of Practice Committee of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine. Practice parameters for the evaluation of chronic insomnia. An American Academy of Sleep Medicine report . Sleep. 2000 ; 23 ( 2 ): 237 - 241
50. Johns MW. A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness: the Epworth sleepiness scale . Sleep. 1991 ; 14 ( 6 ): 540 - 545
51. Beck AT, Streer RA, Garbin MG, eds. Beck Depression Inventory. 2nd ed. San Antonio, TX : Psychological Corporation ; 1996
52. Spielberger CD, Gorssuch RL, Lushene PR, Vagg PR, Jacobs GA. Manual for the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Palo Alto, CA : Consulting Psychologists Press ; 1983
53. Morin C, Espie C. Insomnia: a Clinical Guide to Assessment and Treatment. New York, NY: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers ; 2003
54. Morin CM, Bootzin RR, Buysse DJ, Edinger JD, Espie CA, Lichstein KL. Psychological and behavioral treatment of insomnia: update of the recent evidence (1998-2004) . Sleep. 2006 ; 29 ( 11 ): 1398 - 1414
55. Ancoli-Israel S, Cole R, Alessi C, Chambers M, Moorcroft W, Pollak CP. The role of actigraphy in the study of sleep and circadian rhythms . Sleep. 2003 ; 26 ( 3 ): 342 - 392
56. Sateia M, Buysse D, eds. Insomnia: Diagnosis and Treatment. London, England : Informa Healthcare ; 2010
57. McCrae CS, Nau SD, Taylor DL, Lichstein KL. Insomnia . In: Fisher JE, O’Donohue WT, eds. Practitioner’s Guide to Evidence-Based Psychotherapy. New York, NY: Springer; 2006; 324 - 334

| Study | Authors | Findings |
|-------|---------|----------|
| 58 | Irwin MR, Cole JC, Nicassio PM | Comparative meta-analysis of behavioral interventions for insomnia and their efficacy in middle-aged adults and in older adults 551 years of age |
| 59 | Krakow B, Melendrez D, Lee SA, Warner TD, Clark JO, Sklar D | Refractory insomnia and sleep-disordered breathing: a pilot study |
| 60 | Guilleminault C, Davis K, Huynh NT | Prospective randomized study of patients with insomnia and mild sleep disordered breathing |
| 61 | Kapella MC, Herdegen JJ, Perlis ML, et al | Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia comorbid with COPD is feasible with preliminary evidence of positive sleep and fatigue effects |
| 62 | Rybarczyk B, Lopez M, Benson R, Alsten C, Stepanski E | Efficacy of two behavioral treatment programs for comorbid geriatric insomnia |
| 63 | Rybarczyk B, Mack L, Harris JH, Stepanski E | Testing two types of self-help CBT-I for insomnia in older adults with arthritis or coronary artery disease |
| 64 | Chesson ALJr, Anderson WM, Littner M, et al | Practice parameters for the nonpharmacologic treatment of chronic insomnia. An American Academy of Sleep Medicine report |
| 65 | Sivertsen B, Omvik S, Pallesen S, et al | Cognitive behavioral therapy vs zopiclone for treatment of chronic primary insomnia in older adults: a randomized controlled trial |
| 66 | Soeffing JP, Lichstein KL, Nau SD, et al | Psychological treatment of insomnia in hypnotic-dependant older adults |
| 67 | Harvey L, Inglis SJ, Espie CA | Insomniacs’ reported use of CBT components and relationship to long-term clinical outcome |
| 68 | Bliwise DL, Friedman L, Nekich JC, Yesavage JA | Prediction of outcome in behaviorally based insomnia treatments |
| 69 | Friedman L, Benson K, Noda A, et al | An actigraphic comparison of sleep restriction and sleep hygiene treatments for insomnia in older adults |
| 70 | Lichstein KL, Riedel BW, Wilson NM, Lester KW, Aguillard RN | Relaxation and sleep compression for late-life insomnia: a placebo-controlled trial |
| 71 | Harvey AG | A cognitive theory and therapy for chronic insomnia |
| 72 | Edinger JD, Wohlgemuth WK, Radtke RA, Marsh GR, Quillian RE | Does cognitive-behavioral insomnia therapy alter dysfunctional beliefs about sleep? |
| 73 | Espie CA, Inglis SJ, Harvey L, Tessier S | Insomniacs’ attributions. Psychometric properties of the Dysfunctional Beliefs and Attitudes about Sleep Scale and the Sleep Disturbance Questionnaire |
| 74 | Edinger JD, Sampson WS | A primary care “friendly” cognitive behavioral insomnia therapy |
| 75 | Morin CM, Colecchi C, Stone J, Sood R, Brink D | Behavioral and pharmacological therapies for late-life insomnia: a randomized controlled trial |
| 76 | Perlis ML, Sharpe M, Smith MT, Greenblatt D, Giles D | Behavioral treatment of insomnia: treatment outcome and the relevance of medical and psychiatric morbidity |
| 77 | Edinger JD, Wohlgemuth WK, Krystal AD, Rice JR | Behavioral insomnia therapy for fibromyalgia patients: a randomized clinical trial |
| 78 | Currie SR, Wilson KG, Pontefract AJ, deLaplante L | Cognitive-behavioral treatment of insomnia secondary to chronic pain |
| 79 | Quesnel C, Savard J, Simard S, Ivers H, Morin CM | Efficacy of cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia in women treated for nonmetastatic breast cancer |
| 80 | Savard J, Simard S, Ivers H, Morin CM | Randomized study on the efficacy of cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia secondary to breast cancer, part I: sleep and psychological effects |
| 81 | McCurry SM, Logsdon RG, Vitiello MV, Teri L | Successful behavioral treatment for reported sleep problems in elderly caregivers of dementia patients: a controlled study |
| 82 | McCurry SM, Gibbons LE, Logsdon RG, Vitiello MV, Teri L | Nighttime insomnia treatment and education for Alzheimer’s disease: a randomized, controlled trial |
| 83 | Edinger JD | Choosing a CBT for insomnia specialist |
| 84 | McCrae CS | Incorporating psychologists into your practice | 