# What Keeps Us Awake: the Neuropharmacology of Stimulants and Wakefulness-Promoting Medications

## Abstract
Numerous studies dissecting the basic mechanisms that control sleep regulation have led to considerable improvement in our knowledge of sleep disorders. It is now well accepted that transitions between sleep and wakefulness are regulated by complex neurobiologic mechanisms, which, ultimately, can be delineated as oscillations between two opponent processes, one promoting sleep and the other promoting wakefulness. The role of several neurotransmitter or neuromodulator systems, including noradrenergic, serotonergic, cholinergic, adenosinergic, and histaminergic systems and, more recently, the hypocretin/orexin and dopamine systems, has been clearly established. Amphetamine-like stimulants are known to increase wakefulness by blocking dopamine reuptake, by stimulating dopamine release, or by both mechanisms. Modafinil may increase wakefulness through activation of noradrenergic and dopaminergic systems, possibly through interaction with the hypocretin/orexin system. Caffeine inhibits adenosinergic receptors, which in turn can produce activation via interaction with GABAergic and dopaminergic neurotransmission. Nicotine enhances acetylcholine neurotransmission in the basal forebrain and dopamine release. Understanding the exact role of the hypocretin/orexin and dopamine systems in the physiology and pharmacology of sleep-wake regulation may reveal new insights into current and future wakefulness-promoting drugs.

**Key Words:** stimulant, wake-promoting medication, sleepiness, cocaine, amphetamine, methylphenidate, modafinil, caffeine, nicotine

## INTRODUCTION
DISCOVERING TREATMENTS TO FIGHT EFFICIENTLY AGAINST EXCESSIVE DAYTIME SLEEPINESS IS A CHALLENGE FOR BOTH SLEEP MEDICINE AND BASIC SCIENCE. Indeed, sleep disorders are increasingly prevalent, and their association with significant morbidity has become a public health concern. Numerous disorders and diseases lead to excessive somnolence, but 80% of individuals who present with these symptoms have sleep apnea, narcolepsy, or idiopathic hypersomnia. Many people with these disorders find controlling excessive sleepiness to be crucial to maintaining the ability to interact in their social, professional, and family lives. Primary treatments for sleepiness associated with these disorders are based on psychomotor stimulants, which are known for exerting an efficient wake-promoting effect. However, their high potential for abuse and side effects represent a limitation for their prescription and use. For the last decade, modafinil has become an increasingly popular wake-promoting medication used for the treatment of narcolepsy because little or no addiction potential has been shown with the consumption of this compound.

Interestingly, problems of excessive daytime sleepiness are not exclusively linked to sleep disorders or diseases. In industrial societies, work efficiency and productivity have become a primary goal that has contributed to mass consumption of psycho-stimulants, the wake-promoting properties of which allay fatigue and enhance attention, sometimes to counterbalance excessive nighttime wakefulness. Amphetamine and cocaine consumption are marginal compared to caffeine and nicotine, considered as the most widely consumed psychostimulants in the world. The impact of the intake of these psychoactive substances on public health is a growing concern that should not be underestimated. The aim of this review is to summarize the neuropharmacology of the most commonly used stimulants and wake-promoting medications by examining their effects on sleep, molecular and cellular mechanisms of action, and undesirable side effects. To comprehend the molecular and cellular aspects of this review, a succinct presentation of basic sleep-waking mechanisms is necessary. Briefly, sleep-waking regulation involves reciprocal interactions between two opponent processes, one promoting arousal and inhibiting sleep, and the other promoting sleep and inhibiting wakefulness. Wake-promoting agents act through different mechanisms, but ultimately they all stimulate the waking system, slow down the sleep-promoting system, or both. Neuropharmacologic mechanisms for the wake-promoting effects of stimulants then will be discussed with a focus on interactions with wake- and sleep-promoting systems. Finally, the role of dopamine in promoting arousal associated with the use of psychostimulant drugs will be explored, and particular attention will be given to other mechanisms of action that could lead to new wake-promoting treatments in the near future.

## PHYSIOLOGIC BASIS OF SLEEP-WAKE REGULATION
### The Monoaminergic and Cholinergic Control of Sleep
An early report of a wake-promoting system appeared with the description of a brainstem-ascending reticular-activating system that regulates the level of forebrain wakefulness. Wakefulness currently is described as the expression of a complex neuronal network characterized by electroencephalogram desynchronization. The waking executive network is composed of two pathways, both originating from the midbrain reticular formation and mainly composed of glutamatergic neurons, the electrophysiologic activity of which depends on cholinergic and monoaminergic neurotransmission. ## The Hypothalamus: A Key Structure Regulating the Switch Between Sleep and Wakefulness

The importance of the preoptic hypothalamus in the generation of slow-wave sleep has long been recognized. Electrophysiologic recordings have identified slow-wave sleep-active neurons in this area where lesions produce insomnia in animals and humans. More recently, it has been shown that a subgroup containing γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic and galaninergic cells in the ventrolateral preoptic area (an anterior hypothalamic cell group) projects to all monoaminergic systems, and especially to the tuberomammillary nucleus, a posterior hypothalamic cell group. The relationship between the ventrolateral preoptic area and the major monoamine groups appears to be reciprocal. The ventrolateral preoptic area is innervated by histaminergic axons from the tuberomammillary nucleus and receives inhibitory inputs from noradrenergic, serotonergic, and cholinergic waking systems. When neurons in the ventrolateral preoptic area fire rapidly during sleep, they inhibit monoaminergic cell groups, thus disinhibiting and reinforcing their own firing. Conversely, when monoamine neurons fire at a high rate during wakefulness, they inhibit the ventrolateral preoptic area, thereby disinhibiting their own firing. To summarize, sleep-waking regulations are orchestrated by reciprocal interactions between wake- and sleep-promoting neurons that inhibit each other.

## The Hypocretins/Orexins: A System That Orchestrates Arousal

Since their discovery hypocretin/orexin peptides have been implicated in sleep-wake regulation, energy homeostasis, and cortical activation.

### Figure 1—Vigilance is orchestrated by the ascending arousal system

| Structure | Function |
|-----------|----------|
| Hypothalamus | Sleep/wake switch |
| Thalamus | Relays sensory input from the brainstem to the cortex during wakefulness |
| VLPO (GABA, Gal) | Inhibitory input |
| TMN (His) | Maintains arousal |
| LH (HcrVOrexin) | Maintains arousal |
| Brainstem | Sends cholinergic, serotonergic, and noradrenergic fibers |

### Figure 2—Hypocretin neurons in the lateral hypothalamus project to the main components of the ascending arousal system

| Neuron Type | Neurotransmitter | Function |
|-------------|------------------|----------|
| LDT/PPT | Ach | Wakefulness consolidation |
| DRN | 5-HT | Sends serotonergic fibers |
| LC | NA | Sends noradrenergic fibers |
| TMN | His | Sends histaminergic fibers |
| LH | Hcrt | Sends hypocretinergic fibers |
| VLPO | GABA, Gal | Contains sleep-waking neurons |

EEG refers to electroencephalogram. neurocrine and cardiovascular function. Their wide projection in the brain and their interaction with autonomic, neuroendocrine, and neuroregulatory systems strongly suggest they act as neuromodulators in a wide array of neural circuitry. They also have been implicated in the modulation of noradrenergic, cholinergic, serotonergic, histaminergic, and dopaminergic systems, as well as in the regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. A key contribution in the etiology of narcolepsy was provided by several studies linking the hypocretin/orexin system to this disease. First, two different animal models with an impaired hypocretin/orexin system—genetic narcoleptic dogs with a mutation in the Hcrt receptor 2 gene, and mice with a null mutation of the prepro-hypocretin gene that produces Hcrt-1 and Hcrt-2 peptides—showed symptoms of narcolepsy, suggesting that impairment of the hypocretin/orexin system may underlie the syndrome of human narcolepsy. It then was confirmed that human narcoleptic patients exhibit a drastic reduction (85%-95%) in hypocretin-1 in the cerebrospinal fluid and in the number of hypocretin neurons, leading to the hypothesis that narcolepsy could be related to ongoing loss of hypocretin neurons. In the current models, the hypocretin/orexin system stabilizes the firing of brainstem neurons that control wakefulness and REM sleep (cholinergic in the laterodorsal/pedunculopontine tegmental nuclei, noradrenergic in the locus coeruleus, serotonergic in the dorsal raphe nucleus, and histaminergic in the tuberomammillary nucleus; Figure 2). Interestingly, hypocretins also have a strong and direct excitatory effect on the cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain that contribute to cortical arousal, but they have no effect on GABA sleep-promoting neurons within the ventrolateral preoptic area. Furthermore, the arousal effect of the hypocretin-1 neuropeptide seems to depend on activation of the histaminergic system. In conclusion, the hypocretin/orexin system may be considered as a key regulator that integrates sensory inputs and orchestrates the arousal threshold. Absence of hypocretin/orexin peptides or specific components of their signaling system may cause destabilization of the boundaries between sleep states that are found in narcolepsy.

## Adenosine: Mediator of Sleepiness After Prolonged Wakefulness

The sedative properties of adenosine were first studied during the 1950s in the cat and were confirmed in the dog 20 years later, without eliciting any appreciable scientific interest. Attention returned to adenosine when it was established during the early 1980s that caffeine was able to bind to adenosine receptors and therefore block its endogenous action. Currently, it is a well-accepted hypothesis that adenosine acts as a mediator of non-REM sleep. Indeed, adenosine is derived from the breakdown of adenosine triphosphate, the main cellular energetic reserve in nervous tissue. During prolonged arousal, cerebral activity leads to the consumption of adenosine triphosphate and a concomitant adenosine accumulation. Extracellular concentration of adenosine doubles in the basal forebrain after sleep deprivation and returns to baseline upon sleep recovery. Adenosine A1 receptor density also doubles with prolonged arousal. Adenosine binds to A1 receptors on cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain, decreasing the firing of these neurons, thereby contributing to a reduction of cortical arousal. Adenosine also may decrease GABAergic neuronal activity within the same area, disinhibiting neurons in the preoptic/anterior hypothalamus that promote sleep. Thus, the transition from wakefulness to slow-wave sleep could be promoted by the accumulation of adenosine within the forebrain, leading to (1) the inhibition of cholinergic neurons that activate cortical arousal and (2) the inhibition of GABAergic neurons projecting to the preoptic/anterior hypothalamus and inhibiting sleep-promoting neurons there.

## Dopamine: A Potential Role in Arousal?

Multiple neurotransmitters—noradrenaline, serotonin, acetylcholine, histamine, adenosine, and hypocretin/orexin—have been studied closely for their relationship to the behavioral arousal state. In contrast, the role assigned to dopamine in sleep-wake regulation has been relatively limited, mainly because the dopamine neuron firing rate varies little between sleep and wake states. However, lesions of dopamine cell groups in the ventral tegmentum that project to the forebrain have been shown to induce a drastic reduction in behavioral arousal in rats, and patients with Parkinson disease, who exhibit consistent dopamine lesions, experience severe sleep disorders. More recently, dopamine D1 and D2 receptors have been clearly implicated in the induction of hyperarousal, and the existence of sleep-state-dependent dopaminergic neurons have been reported in the ventral periaqueductal gray. Interestingly, it has been shown that dopamine neurons in the primate fire in response to salient events in the environment, particularly those that predict reward. Finally, it has been suggested that presynaptic activation of dopamine transmission is a key pharmacologic property mediating the wake-promoting effects of stimulants. Therefore, despite a complex pattern, there is growing evidence that emphasizes dopamine’s role in arousal. The accurate role of dopamine release in the neuropharmacology of wake-promoting agents remains unclear; however, the aim of this review is to point out that, despite partially different mechanisms of action, the most powerful stimulant agents (ie, amphetamine-like stimulants) as well as those that are thought to possess a nondopaminergic mechanism of action (eg, modafinil, caffeine, nicotine), all have in common the property of inducing dopamine release.

## AMPHETAMINE-LIKE STIMULANTS

### Introduction

Psychomotor stimulants are drugs that produce behavioral activation, usually accompanied by increases in arousal, motor activity, and alertness. One of the most commonly known psychostimulants, cocaine, is derived from the coca plant (Erythroxylon coca) and has a long history as a stimulant. It has been used for centuries in tonics and other preparations to allay fatigue. One class of stimulants, amphetamines, was synthesized originally as possible alternative drugs for the treatment of asthma and was the principal component of the original benzedrine asthma inhaler. They were used (and are still used) by the United States military as antifatigue medications, and they currently are legally available for medical use as adjuncts for short-term weight control, in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and in narcolepsy. Oral and intravenous doses of amphetamines increase systolic and diastolic blood pressure and stimulate heart rate, although high doses may induce a reflex slowing of the heart rate. Amphetamines produce bronchial and pupillary dilation as well as decreases in glandular secretion, all effects observed after activation of the sympathetic nervous system. Beneficial effects reported include increased alertness, improved coordination, increased strength and endurance, and increased mental and physical activation, with mood changes of boldness, elation, and friendliness. The nature of the stimulant effects of cocaine and amphetamines depends on the route of administration. Intravenous (8-16 mg of cocaine, 10 mg of D-amphetamine) or inhaled freebase preparations (30 to 50 mg) produce marked, intense, pleasurable sensations characterized as a “rush” that has been likened to sexual orgasm and is thought to be a powerful motivation for the abuse of these drugs. Intranasal doses of 20 to 30 mg of cocaine also produce euphoria, increased confidence and talkativeness, a sense of well-being, and fatigue reduction for approximately 30 minutes. Cocaine has less powerful effects administered orally, presumably due to a markedly slower absorption. Intranasal or oral administration of D-amphetamine in the dose range of 2.5 to 15 mg produces stimulant effects similar to those of cocaine. Intranasal absorption is faster with more intense effects than oral administration, and the stimulant effects of amphetamines last considerably longer than those of cocaine (up to 4 to 6 hours).

Amphetamine has a relatively long half-life, in the range of 8 to 16 hours. Cocaine is rapidly metabolized; its half-life ranges from 48 to 75 minutes. Methylphenidate, an indirect sympathomimetic commonly used for the treatment of narcolepsy, decreases fatigue but not appetite as much as D-amphetamine, and has a half-life of 2 to 4 hours.

### Effects on Sleep

Amphetamine-like stimulants are known and consumed especially for their activity-sustaining effects (increased alertness, strength, and endurance). Their wake-promoting properties are obvious, but objective studies have clearly established their effects on sleep. In rats, cocaine (6 mg/kg, orally and intraperitoneally administered) has been shown to induce a significant increase in sleep latency and a reduction in total sleep time, including a decrease in both slow-wave sleep and REM sleep. In humans, cocaine, amphetamines, and methylphenidate also produce decreases in sleepiness, an increased latency to sleep, and a drastic decrease in REM sleep associated with an increased latency to the onset of this particular vigilance state.

The exact mechanisms by which amphetamine-like stimulants induce their wake-promoting effects remain to be elucidated. The participation of noradrenergic mechanisms has been suggested to explain such effects on sleep; nevertheless, the wake-promoting effect of amphetamine is maintained after severe reduction of brain norepinephrine. It has been demonstrated recently that amphetamine-like compounds require the DAT for their wake-promoting effects, given that DAT knockout mice were totally insensitive to the wake-promoting properties of classical stimulants. Thus, amphetamine-like drugs may promote wakefulness primarily by increasing dopaminergic tone. Accordingly, it has been found that intracerebroventricular infusion of D1 and D2 dopamine-receptor agonists in sleeping rats induces a dose-dependent increase in waking time measured by electroencephalographic and electromyographic indexes of arousal. A recent study has shown that amphetamine infusions directly within basal forebrain sites initiate and maintain alert waking by involving most likely a participation of norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin neurons in a region of the medial basal forebrain encompassing the medial septum/nucleus accumbens shell and the preoptic area of the hypothalamus. Interestingly, this site appeared to be distinct from sites previously associated with amphetamine-induced locomotion. Finally, considerable evidence has shown that acute psychostimulant administration produces a stress-like activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis, leading to increased plasma corticosterone in rats and plasma cortisol in humans, both known to promote wakefulness.

## Undesirable Side Effects

### MODAFINIL

#### Introduction

Management strategies for daytime sleepiness traditionally have included lifestyle changes and the use of psychostimulants (amphetamine, methylphenidate, pemoline) which have been shown to efficiently enhance arousal. Despite this efficacy, some patients or physicians may not be satisfied with psychostimulant therapies, usually because of tolerance or, more often, adverse events. For the last decade, modafinil has become a first-line wake-promoting medication and a useful therapeutic alternative to psychostimulant medications for the treatment of excessive daytime sleepiness. Modafinil-mediated wake promotion initially was reported to be the result of central α1-adrenoceptor stimulation, but recent studies have linked this stimulant effect to the selective activation of hypothalamocortical pathways involved in the physiologic regulation of sleep and wakefulness. Modafinil is not a direct or indirect dopamine-receptor agonist and has a low potential for abuse.

#### Effects on Sleep

It has been shown that modafinil prolongs wakefulness in several species, apparently without associated behavioral excitation, and its waking effect is not followed by any obvious sleep rebound in the cat. In humans, modafinil is efficient and well tolerated, with no evidence of tolerance developing during 40 weeks of treatment. Nevertheless, a study based on maintaining alertness and performance during sleep deprivation has shown equivalent performance- and alertness-enhancing effects after a single dose of either modafinil or caffeine, leading to the conclusion that modafinil does not appear to offer advantages over caffeine for improving performance and alertness during sleep loss in otherwise normal, healthy adults.

## Molecular and Cellular Action of Modafinil in the Brain

The wake-promoting mechanism of action of modafinil remains uncertain, despite numerous reports of its neuropharmacologic action in the brain. Early studies highlighted the absence of an interaction between modafinil and the dopamine system. It also was established that the dopamine D1/D2 antagonist haloperidol did not block the arousal effect of modafinil, whereas it consistently decreased the amphetamine-induced increase in wakefulness. Finally, modafinil showed a low affinity for dopamine reuptake sites. It has been suggested, therefore, that the arousal effects of modafinil could be related to noradrenergic neurotransmission, given that the arousal produced by modafinil was blocked by α1 and ß adrenergic receptor antagonists, and that modafinil affected the firing of locus coeruleus noradrenergic neurons. Using c-Fos immunocytochemistry in cats, it has been shown that amphetamine and methylphenidate do not share with modafinil the same pattern of c-Fos activation in the brain. amphetamine and methylphenidate induced labeled neurons main advantage of modafinil over amphetamine-like stimulants mainly in the cortex and the striatum, modafinil-induced wakefulness was associated mainly with activated neurons in the anterior hypothalamus, emphasizing therefore that modafinil induces wakefulness by mechanisms distinct from those of amphetamine and methylphenidate. Despite a confirmation of c-Fos immunoreactivity in the anterior hypothalamus in modafinil-treated rats, a recent study involving c-Fos labeling in modafinil-treated rats highlighted Fos activation mainly in the tuberomammillary nucleus and in hypocretin/orexin neurons of the perifornical area (and to a lesser extent, in the central nucleus of the amygdala, the striatum, and the cingulate cortex). Thus, these authors concluded that modafinil may exert its stimulant effects via an activation of these two regions implicated in the promotion of normal wakefulness.

However, modafinil is efficient in promoting wakefulness even in narcoleptic patients, whereas it has been demonstrated that narcoleptic patients exhibit a drastic reduction in hypocretin-1 in the cerebrospinal fluid and in the number of hypocretin neurons. Such a discrepancy might be explained by the fact that modafinil may also generate waking by increasing both dopaminergic and serotonergic neurotransmission in the cortex, and by increasing noradrenergic release in the hypothalamus. An early study had also suggested that modafinil could induce dopamine release in the rat nucleus accumbens, but this study did not demonstrate a role for dopamine release per se in the waking effect of modafinil. Finally, using DAT-knockout mice, it has been reported recently that both amphetamine-like compounds and modafinil require the DAT for their wake-promoting effects, leading one to question the hypothesis that modafinil does not exert its waking effects via the dopaminergic system and that modafinil induces wakefulness by mechanisms distinct from those of amphetamine. Interestingly, it has been shown that both hypocretin/orexin and amphetamine act within the basal forebrain to promote waking and suppress sleep. It therefore can be hypothesized that both the hypocretin/orexin and dopaminergic systems act in concert in the basal forebrain to promote wakefulness, but further studies are needed to clarify this hypothesis.

Undesirable Side Effects

No obvious side effects have been observed in the usual range of use and prescription of modafinil (200 mg/day), leading several authors to suggest switching patients to modafinil from psychostimulants such as methylphenidate. Though it has been shown that modafinil was able to affect mood in humans, modafinil does not appear to possess any addiction potential in drug-naive individuals. It has been suggested from studies with animal models that modafinil possibly could have reinforcing effects in cocaine-experienced individuals. Nevertheless, the reinforcing and discriminative stimulus effects of modafinil required very high doses (up to 256 mg/kg intraperitoneally in rats), and modafinil was more than 200 times less potent than D-amphetamine.

Molecular and Cellular Action of Caffeine in the Brain

Although caffeine is known to mobilize intracellular calcium, to inhibit phosphodiesterase activity, and to increase in vitro serotonin and norepinephrine concentrations in the brain- it is now widely accepted that the vigilance mechanism of action of caffeine (in the dose range produced by voluntary caffeine intake) is via the antagonism of adenosine receptors. The caffeine-induced increase of cortical acetylcholine release is dose dependent, and the increased cortical cholinergic activity, resulting from the blockade of A1 receptors, may provide a basis for the psychostimulant effects of caffeine. Caffeine’s wake-promoting effects also could be due to the blocking of adenosine receptors on GABA neurons, which reinforces the inhibition of neurons in the preoptic/anterior hypothalamus that are specifical- differing quantities of caffeine, usually more than 250 mg.

Acute states of confusion also have been associated with very high levels of caffeine intake, more than 1000 mg per day. Anxiety and somatic abnormalities have been observed in regular coffee drinkers even after absorption of small quantities of caffeine (< 250 mg), but these people most likely were very sensitive to caffeine effects. Caffeinism also has been associated with delirium, psychoses, and anorexia nervosa. Finally, several cases of death have been reported following intravenous and oral absorption of an excessive amount of caffeine (5-10 g).

However, while it has been clearly shown that caffeine induces dopamine and glutamate release in the shell of the nucleus accumbens, these actions are not thought to contribute to its psychoactive effects. Furthermore, whereas DAT-knockout mice are unresponsive to the normally robust wake-promoting action of methamphetamine, these mice are hypersensitive to the wake-promoting effects of caffeine.

Actually, the adenosine A1 and A2a receptors seem to be primarily involved in the effects of caffeine on vigilance states, whereas A2b and A3 receptors seem to play only a minor role given that the inhibition of the actions of adenosine at this receptor level is incompatible with caffeine activity under physiologic conditions. Adenosine A1 receptors are present in almost all brain areas, with the highest levels in the hippocampus, cerebral and cerebellar cortices, and certain thalamic nuclei. Only moderate levels have been observed in the caudate putamen and nucleus accumbens. Adenosine A2A receptors are found to be concentrated in dopamine-rich regions of the brain and are colocalized with D2 receptors in rat striatum.

Whereas caffeine affects transmitter release and neuronal firing rates via actions on adenosine A1 receptors, the effects of caffeine on dopaminergic transmission are exerted mainly via actions on adenosine A2A receptors. This indirect interaction of caffeine with the dopamine system is through the opposite actions of adenosine A2a receptors with dopamine D2 receptors. Indeed, it has been shown that stimulation of adenosine A2a receptors opposes the effect of dopamine at striatal output cells.

Finally, it has been suggested that a therapeutic potential exists for the use of A2a antagonists in the treatment of Parkinson disease. This observation is in line with the potential wake-promoting effect of A2a antagonists that could counterbalance the sleepiness usually observed in Parkinson disease patients.

Undesirable Side Effects
Tolerance develops to some, but not all, effects of caffeine in humans and experimental animals. For example, tolerance to the psychostimulant and cardiovascular effects of caffeine usually develops within a couple of days. High-dose caffeine intake has been reported to elicit symptoms of nervousness, agitation, anxiety and insomnia, a syndrome called caffeinism. The majority of patients suffering from caffeinism develop a variety of nervous, gastrointestinal, or cardiac symptoms after consumption of caffeine.

In humans, a transdermal nicotine delivery system (nicotine patch) induces a significant reduction in total sleep time and sleep efficiency, prolonged sleep latency, and decreased REM sleep. In rats, a sleep-suppressant effect has been reported after OTHER TREATMENTS FOR SLEEP DISORDERS
The effects of gammahydroxybutyrate (GHB) on sleep have been investigated for more than 25 years. GHB has some effectiveness on narcolepsy, but it is not a psychostimulant. In laboratory animals, as well as in humans, GHB is rapidly absorbed, freely crosses the blood-brain barrier, and induces a short-lasting central nervous system depression. At low doses, GHB is anxiolytic and myorelaxant, and at intermediate doses, it increases REM sleep and slow-wave sleep. At higher doses, GHB is still used as an anesthetic adjuvant. The mechanisms of GHB action are still unclear. However, the current hypotheses suggest that GHB prevents sleepiness during the daytime in narcoleptic patients by increasing their sleep continuity at night. However, despite an absence of misuse or tolerance in narcoleptic patients, GHB users may be at risk for addiction, characterized by repeated consumption, tolerance, craving, compulsive drug-seeking, and withdrawal. Interestingly, GHB has been shown to have an effect on dopamine systems in the brain, notably by inhibiting dopamine release; no evidence to date supports the hypothesis that decreased dopaminergic transmission could mediate the hypnotic properties of GHB.

The histaminergic system has a key role in waking, and the effectiveness of histamine H3-receptor antagonists to promote wakefulness has been clearly established in rats. More recently, H3-receptor blockade has been shown to enhance cognition in rats, and their action on cortical desynchronization has been clearly established. However, no clinical trial has yet been published showing that H3 antagonists promote wakefulness in humans.

Finally, recent data have demonstrated a key involvement of the hypocretin/orexin system in the etiology of narcolepsy. Thus, a hypocretin agonist should be able to compensate for hypocretin deficiency and, therefore, should be efficient in promoting wakefulness. However, no available clinical data so far support the effectiveness of this approach in treating sleep disorders.

CONCLUSIONS
Excessive sleepiness is thought to result from the lack of maintenance of the arousal threshold, which, ultimately, alleviates the inhibition exerted on the sleep-promoting system during wakefulness. Wake-promoting agents reinforce wakefulness by stimulating the release of neurotransmitters involved in the maintenance of the arousal threshold and, therefore, counterbalance the inhibitory inputs from the sleep-promoting system to the wake-promoting one. Nicotine stimulates the cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain that lead to cortical activation. Caffeine participates in cortical activation by blocking adenosine receptors located on cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain. Caffeine also blocks adenosine receptors located on GABAergic neurons, thus reinforcing the inhibition exerted on neurons in the preoptic/anterior hypothalamus that are involved in sleep induction and may indirectly increase dopamine neurotransmission. Modafinil may promote waking via activation of the tuberomammillary nucleus and hypocretin neurons, which leads to an activation of the ascending arousal system. The fact that either amphetamine-like stimulants or modafinil have failed to exert any waking effect on DAT knockout mice suggests that the dopamine system may play a role in the wake-promoting properties of these compounds. Understanding how wake-promoting drugs interact with different components of the dopamine system to induce arousal remains a challenge for future research to establish new stimulant treatments.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This is publication number 16145-NP from The Scripps Research Institute. Benjamin Boutrel was supported by a fellowship from La Fondation pour la Recherche Medicale, France. George Koob was supported by National Institutes of Health grant DA04398 from the National Institute on Drug Abuse. The authors would like to acknowledge the invaluable editorial assistance of Mike Arends in the preparation of this manuscript.

REFERENCES

1. Mignot E, Taheri S, Nishino S. Sleeping with the hypothalamus: emerging therapeutic targets for sleep disorders. Nat Neurosci 2002;5 Suppl:1071-5.
2. Mitler MM, Aldrich MS, Koob GF, Zarcone VP. Narcolepsy and its treatment with stimulants. ASDA standards of practice. Sleep 1994;17:352-71.
3. Moruzzi G, Magoun HW. Brain stem reticular formation and activation of the EEG. 1949. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 1995;7:251-67.
4. Steriade M. Awakening the brain. Nature 1996;383:24-5.
5. Steriade M. Arousal: revisiting the reticular activating system. Science 1996;272:225-6.
6. Saper CB, Chou TC, Scammell TE. The sleep switch: hypothalamic control of sleep and wakefulness. Trends Neurosci 2001; 24:726-31.
7. Jones BE. The organization of central cholinergic systems and their functional importance in sleep-waking states. Prog Brain Res 1993;98:61-71.
8. Hobson JA, McCarley RW, Wyzinski PW. Sleep cycle oscillation: reciprocal discharge by two brainstem neuronal groups. Science 1975;189:55-8.
9. McCarley RW, Hobson JA. Neuronal excitability modulation over the sleep cycle: a structural and mathematical model. Science 1975;189:58-60.
10. Pace-Schott EF, Hobson JA. The neurobiology of sleep: genetics, cellular physiology and subcortical networks. Nat Rev Neurosci 2002;3:591-605.
11. Steininger TL, Gong H, McGinty D, Szymusiak R. Subregional organization of preoptic area/anterior hypothalamic projections to arousal-related monoaminergic cell groups. J Comp Neurol 2001;429:638-53.
12. Sherin JE, Shiromani PJ, McCarley RW, Saper CB. Activation of ventrolateral preoptic neurons during sleep. Science 1996;271:216-9.
13. Gallopin T, Fort P, Eggermann E, et al. Identification of sleep-promoting neurons in vitro. Nature 2000 404:992-5.
14. De Lecea L, Kilduff TS, Peyron C, et al. The hypocretins: hypothalamus-specific peptides with neuroexcitatory activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:322-7.
15. Sakurai T, Amemiya A, Ishii M et al. Orexins and orexin receptors: a family of hypothalamic neuropeptides and G protein-coupled receptors that regulate feeding behavior. Cell 1998; 92:697.
16. Sutcliffe JG, De Lecea L. The hypocretins: setting the arousal threshold. Nat Rev Neurosci 2002;3:339-49.
17. Peyron C, Tighe DK, van den Pol AN, et al. Neurons containing hypocretin (orexin) project to multiple neuronal systems. J Neurosci 1998;18:9996-10015.
18. Chen CT, Hwang LL, Chang JK, Dun NJ. Pressor effects of orexins injected intracisternally and to rostral ventrolateral medulla of anesthetized rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 2000;278:R692-7.
19. Date Y, Mondal MS, Matsukura S, et al. Distribution of orexin/hypocretin in the rat median eminence and pituitary. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2000;76:1-6.
20. Hagan JJ, Leslie RA, Patel S, et al. Orexin A activates locus coeruleus cell firing and increases arousal in the rat. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96:10911-6.
21. Ida T, Nakahara K, Murakami T, Hanada R, Nakazato M, Murakami N. Possible involvement of orexin in the stress reaction in rats. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2000;270:318-23.
22. Malendowicz LK, Tortorella C, Nussdorfer GG. Orexins stimulate corticosterone secretion of rat adrenocortical cells, through the activation of the adenylate cyclase-dependent signaling cascade. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 1999;70:185-8.
23. Nowak KW, Mackowiak P, Switonska MM, Fabis M, Malendowicz LK. Acute orexin effects on insulin secretion in the rat: in vivo and in vitro studies. Life Sci 2000;66:449-54.
24. Samson WK, Gosnell B, Chang JK, Resch ZT, Murphy TC. Cardiovascular regulatory actions of the hypocretins in brain. Brain Res 1999;831:248-53.
25. Shirasaka T, Kunitake T, Takasaki M, Kannan H. Neuronal effects of orexins: relevant to sympathetic and cardiovascular functions. Regul Pept 2002;104:91-5.
26. Bourgin P, Huitron-Resendiz S, Spier AD et al. Hypocretin-1 modulates rapid eye movement sleep through activation of locus coeruleus neurons. J Neurosci 2000;20:7760-5.
27. Horvath TL, Peyron C, Diano S et al. Hypocretin (orexin) activation and synaptic innervation of the locus coeruleus noradrenergic system. J Comp Neurol 1999;415:145-59.
28. Ivanov A, Aston-Jones G. Hypocretin/orexin depolarizes and decreases potassium conductance in locus coeruleus neurons. Neuroreport 2000;11:1755-8.
29. Burlet S, Tyler CJ, Leonard CS. Direct and indirect excitation of laterodorsal tegmental neurons by Hypocretin/Orexin peptides: implications for wakefulness and narcolepsy. J Neurosci 2002;22:2862-72.
30. Brown RE, Sergeeva OA, Eriksson KS, Haas HL. Convergent excitation of dorsal raphe serotonin neurons by multiple arousal systems (orexin/hypocretin, histamine and noradrenaline). J Neurosci 2002;22:8850-9.
31. Brown RE, Sergeeva O, Eriksson KS, Haas HL. Orexin A excites serotonergic neurons in the dorsal raphe nucleus of the rat. Neuropharmacology 2001;40:457-9.
32. Eriksson KS, Sergeeva O, Brown RE, Haas HL. Orexin/hypocretin excites the histaminergic neurons of the tuberomammillary nucleus. J Neurosci 2001;21:9273-9.
33. Nakamura T, Uramura K, Nambu T et al. Orexin-induced hyperlocomotion and stereotypy are mediated by the dopaminergic system. Brain Res 2000;873:181-7.
34. Korotkova TM, Sergeeva OA, Eriksson KS, Haas HL, Brown RE. Excitation of ventral tegmental area dopaminergic and non-dopaminergic neurons by orexins/hypocretins. J Neurosci 2003;23:7-11.
35. Jaszberenyi M, Bujdoso E, Pataki I, Telegdy G. Effects of orexins on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal system. J Neuroendocrinol 2000;12:1174-8.
36. Kuru M, Ueta Y, Serino R et al. Centrally administered orexin/hypocretin activates HPA axis in rats. Neuroreport 2000;11:1977-80.
37. Stricker-Krongrad A, Beck B. Modulation of hypothalamic hypocretin/orexin mRNA expression by glucocorticoids. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002;296:129-33.
38. Lin L, Faraco J, Li R et al. The sleep disorder canine narcolepsy is caused by a mutation in the hypocretin (orexin) receptor 2 gene

| Reference | Authors | Title | Journal | Year | Volume | Pages |
|-----------|---------|-------|---------|------|--------|-------|
| 39 | Chemelli RM, Willie JT, Sinton CM et al. | Narcolepsy in orexin knockout mice: molecular genetics of sleep regulation | Cell | 1999 | 98 | 437-51 |
| 40 | Nishino S, Ripley B, Overeem S, Lammers GJ, Mignot E. | Hypocretin (orexin) deficiency in human narcolepsy | Lancet | 2000 | 355 | 39-40 |
| 41 | Peyron C, Faraco J, Rogers W, et al. | A mutation in a case of early onset narcolepsy and a generalized absence of hypocretin peptides in human narcoleptic brains | Nat Med | 2000 | 6 | 991-7 |
| 42 | Thannickal TC, Moore RY, Nienhuis R, et al. | Reduced number of hypocretin neurons in human narcolepsy | Neuron | 2000 | 27 | 469-74 |
| 43 | van den Pol AN. | Narcolepsy: a neurodegenerative disease of the hypocretin system? | Neuron | 2000 | 27 | 415-8 |
| 44 | Eggermann E, Serafin M, Bayer L, et al. | Orexins/hypocretins excite basal forebrain cholinergic neurones | Neuroscience | 2001 | 108 | 177-81 |
| 45 | Huang ZL, Qu WM, Li WD, et al. | Arousal effect of orexin A depends on activation of the histaminergic system | Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A | 2001 | 98 | 9965-70 |
| 46 | Haulica I, Ababei L, Branisteanu D, Topoliceanu F, Busuioc A. | Preliminary data on the possible hypnogenic role of adenosine | Rev Roum Physiol | 1973 | 10 | 275-9 |
| 47 | Snyder SH, Katims JJ, Annau Z, Bruns RF, Daly JW. | Adenosine receptors and behavioral actions of methylxanthines | Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A | 1981 | 78 | 3260-4 |
| 48 | Strecker RE, Morairty S, Thakkar MM et al. | Adenosinergic modulation of basal forebrain and preoptic/anterior hypothalamic neuronal activity in the control of behavioral state | Behav Brain Res | 2000 | 115 | 183-204 |
| 49 | Thakkar MM, Winston S, McCarley RW. | A1 receptor and adenosinergic homeostatic regulation of sleep-wakefulness: effects of antisense to the A1 receptor in the cholinergic basal forebrain | J Neurosci | 2003 | 23 | 4278-87 |
| 50 | Fredholm BB, Battig K, Holmen J, Nehlig A, Zvartau EE. | Actions of caffeine in the brain with special reference to factors that contribute to its widespread use | Pharmacol Rev | 1999 | 51 | 83-133 |
| 51 | Basheer R, Porkka-Heiskanen T, Strecker RE, Thakkar MM, McCarley RW. | Adenosine as a biological signal mediating sleepiness following prolonged wakefulness | Biol Signals Recept | 2000 | 9 | 319-27 |
| 52 | Porkka-Heiskanen T, Alanko L, Kalinchuk A, Stenberg D. | Adenosine and sleep | Sleep Med Rev | 2002 | 6 | 321-32 |
| 53 | Portas CM, Thakkar M, Rainnie DG, Greene RW, McCarley RW. | Role of adenosine in behavioral state modulation: a microdialysis study in the freely moving cat | Neuroscience | 1997 | 79 | 225-35 |
| 54 | Porkka-Heiskanen T, Strecker RE, Thakkar M, Bjorkum AA, Greene RW, McCarley RW. | Adenosine: a mediator of the sleep-inducing effects of prolonged wakefulness | Science | 1997 | 276 | 1265-8 |
| 55 | Basheer R, Porkka-Heiskanen T, Stenberg D, McCarley RW. | Adenosine and behavioral state control: adenosine increases c-Fos protein and AP1 binding in basal forebrain of rats | Brain Res Mol Brain Res | 1999 | 73 | 1-10 |
| 56 | Rainnie DG, Grunze HC, McCarley RW, Greene RW. | Adenosine inhibition of mesopontine cholinergic neurons: implications for EEG arousal | Science | 1994 | 263 | 689-92 |
| 57 | Chamberlin NL, Arrigoni E, Chou TC, Scammell TE, Greene RW, Saper CB. | Effects of adenosine on gabaergic synaptic inputs to identified ventrolateral preoptic neurons | Neuroscience | 2003 | 119 | 913-8 |
| 58 | Miller JD, Farber J, Gatz P, Roffwarg H, German DC. | Activity of mesencephalic dopamine and non-dopamine neurons across stages of sleep and walking in the rat | Brain Res | 1983 | 273 | 133-41 |
| 59 | Steinfels GF, Heym J, Strecker RE, Jacobs BL. | Behavioral correlates of dopaminergic unit activity in freely moving cats | Brain Res | 1983 | 258 | 217-28 |
| 60 | Jones BE, Bobillier P, Pin C, Jouvet M. | The effect of lesions of catecholamine-containing neurons upon monoamine content of the brain and EEG and behavioral waking in the cat | Brain Res | 1973 | 58 | 57-177 |
| 61 | Rye DB, Jankovic J. | Emerging views of dopamine in modulating sleep/wake state from an unlikely source: PD | Neurology | 2002 | 58 | 341-6 |
| 62 | Paus S, Brecht HM, Koster J, Seeger G, Klockgether T, Wullner U. | Sleep attacks, daytime sleepiness, and dopamine agonists in Parkinson's disease | Mov Disord | 2003 | 18 | 659-67 |
| 63 | Isaac SO, Berridge CW. | Wake-promoting actions of dopamine D1 and D2 receptor stimulation | J Pharmacol Exp Ther | 2003 | 307 | 386-94 |
| 64 | Matheson JK, Saper CB. | REM sleep behavior disorder: a dopaminergic deficiency disorder? | Neurology | 2003 | 61 | 1328-9 |
| 65 | Schultz W. | Predictive reward signal of dopamine neurons | J Neurophysiol | 1998 | 80 | 1-27 |
| 66 | Schultz W. | The reward signal of midbrain dopamine neurons | News Physiol Sci | 1999 | 14 | 249-55 |
| 67 | Waelti P, Dickinson A, Schultz W. | Dopamine responses comply with basic assumptions of formal learning theory | Nature | 2001 | 412 | 43-8 |
| 68 | Kanbayashi T, Honda K, Kodama T, Mignot E, Nishino S. | Implication of dopaminergic mechanisms in the wake-promoting effects of amphetamine: a study of D- and L-derivatives in canine narcolepsy | Neuroscience | 2000 | 99 | 651-9 |
| 69 | Nishino S, Mao J, Sampathkumaran R, Shelton J. | Increased dopaminergic transmission mediates the wake-promoting effects of CNS stimulants | Sleep Res Online | 1998 |  | 49-61 |
| 70 | Angrist B, Gershon S. | Dopamine and psychotic states: preliminary remarks | Adv Biochem Psychopharmacol | 1974 | 2 | 211-9 |
| 71 | Siegel RK. | New patterns of cocaine use: changing doses and routes | NIDA Res Monogr | 1985 | 61 | 204-20 |
| 72 | Smith GM, Beecher HK. | Amphetamine, secobarbital, and athletic performance. II. Subjective evaluations of performance, mood states, and physical states | JAMA | 1960 | 172 | 1502-14 |
| 73 | Davis JM, Kopin IJ, Lemberger L, Axelrod J. | Effects of urinary pH on amphetamine metabolism | Ann N Y Acad Sci | 1971 | 179 | 493-501 |
| 74 | Wilkinson P, Van Dyke C, Jatlow P, Barash P, Byck R. | Intranasal and oral cocaine kinetics | Clin Pharmacol Ther | 1980 | 27 | 386-94 |
| 75 | Faraj BA, Israili ZH, Perel JM, et al. | Metabolism and disposition of methylphenidate-14C: studies in man and animals | J Pharmacol Exp Ther | 1974 | 191 | 535-47 |
| 76 | Hill SY, Mendelson WB, Bernstein DA. | Cocaine effects on sleep parameters in the rat | Psychopharmacology (Berl) | 1977 | 51 | 125-7 |
| 77 | Rechtschaffen A, Maron L. | The effect of amphetamine on the sleep cycle | Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol | 1964 | 16 | 438-45 |
| 78 | Baekeland F. | The effect of methyl phenidate on the sleep cycle in man | Psychopharmacologia | 1966 | 10 | 179-83 |
| 79 | Oswald I. | Drugs and sleep | Pharmacol Rev | 1968 | 20 | 273-303 |
| 80 | Valerde C, Pastrana LS, Ruiz JA, et al. | Neuroendocrine and electroencephalographic sleep changes due to acute amphetamine ingestion in human beings | Neuroendocrinology | 1976 | 22 | 57-71 |
| 81 | Glowinski J, Axelrod J. | Effect of drugs on the uptake, release, and metabolism of H3-norepinephrine in the rat brain | J Pharmacol Exp Ther | 1965 | 149 | 43-9 |
| 82 | Ferris RM, Tang FL, Maxwell RA. | A comparison of the capacities of isomers of amphetamine, deoxypipradrol and methylphenidate to inhibit the uptake of tritiated catecholamines into rat cerebral cortex slices, synaptosomal preparations of rat cerebral cortex, hypothalamus and striatum and into adrenergic nerves of rabbit aorta | J Pharmacol Exp Ther | 1972 | 181 | 407-16 |
| 83 | Iversen LL. | Catecholamine uptake processes | Br Med Bull |  |  |  | SLEEP, Vol. 27, No. 6, 2004

| Reference Number | Authors | Title | Journal | Year | Volume | Pages |
|------------------|---------|-------|---------|------|--------|-------|
| 84 | Raiteri M, Bertollini A, Angelini F, Levi G | d-Amphetamine as a releaser or reuptake inhibitor of biogenic amines in synaptosomes | Eur J Pharmacol | 1975 | 34 | 189-95 |
| 85 | Taylor D, Ho BT | Comparison of inhibition of monoamine uptake by cocaine, methylphenidate and amphetamine | Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol | 1978 | 21 | 67-75 |
| 86 | Koob GF, Sanna PP, Bloom FE | Neuroscience of addiction | Neuron | 1998 | 21 | 467-76 |
| 87 | Koob GF | Drugs of abuse: anatomy, pharmacology and function of reward pathways | Trends Pharmacol Sci | 1992 | 13 | 177-84 |
| 88 | Koob GF | Hedonic valence, dopamine and motivation | Mol Psychiatry | 1996 |  | 186-9 |
| 89 | Leshner AI, Koob GF | Drugs of abuse and the brain | Proc Assoc Am Physicians | 1999 | 111 | 99-108 |
| 90 | Kelley AE, Berridge KC | The neuroscience of natural rewards: relevance to addictive drugs | J Neurosci | 2002 | 22 | 3306-11 |
| 91 | DeLong MR | Primate models of movement disorders of basal ganglia origin | Trends Neurosci | 1990 | 13 | 281-5 |
| 92 | Kebabian JW, Calne DB | Multiple receptors for dopamine | Nature | 1979 | 77 | 93-6 |
| 93 | Monsma FJ, Jr., Mahan LC, McVittie LD, Gerfen CR, Sibley DR | Molecular cloning and expression of a D1 dopamine receptor linked to adenylyl cyclase activation | Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A | 1990 | 87 | 6723-7 |
| 94 | Sokoloff P, Giros B, Martres MP, Bouthenet ML, Schwartz JC | Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel dopamine receptor (D3) as a target for neuroleptics | Nature | 1990 | 347 | 146-51 |
| 95 | Van Tol HH, Bunzow JR, Guan HC, et al | Cloning of the gene for a human dopamine D4 receptor with high affinity for the antipsychotic clozapine | Nature | 1991 | 350 | 610-4 |
| 96 | Sunahara RK, Guan HC, O'Dowd BF, et al | Cloning of the gene for a human dopamine D5 receptor with higher affinity for dopamine than D1 | Nature | 1991 | 350 | 614-9 |
| 97 | Xu M, Moratalla R, Gold LH, et al | Dopamine D1 receptor mutant mice are deficient in striatal expression of dynorphin and in dopamine-mediated behavioral responses | Cell | 1994 | 9 | 729-42 |
| 98 | Baik JH, Picetti R, Saiardi A et al | Parkinsonian-like locomotor impairment in mice lacking dopamine D2 receptors | Nature | 1995 | 377 | 424-8 |
| 99 | Maldonado R, Saiardi A, Valverde O, Samad TA, Roques BP, Borrelli E | Absence of opiate rewarding effects in mice lacking dopamine D2 receptors | Nature | 1997 | 388 | 586-9 |
| 100 | Narita M, Mizuo K, Mizoguchi H, et al | Molecular evidence for the functional role of dopamine D3 receptor in the morphine-induced rewarding effect and hyperlocomotion | J Neurosci | 2003 | 23 | 1006-12 |
| 101 | Rubinstein M, Phillips TJ, Bunzow JR, et al | Mice lacking dopamine D4 receptors are supersensitive to ethanol, cocaine, and methamphetamine | Cell | 1997 | 90 | 991-1001 |
| 102 | Holmes A, Hollon TR, Gleason TC, et al | Behavioral characterization of dopamine D5 receptor null mutant mice | Behav Neurosci | 2001 | 115 | 1129-44 |
| 103 | Hollon TR, Bek MJ, Lachowicz JE, et al | Mice lacking D5 dopamine receptors have increased sympathetic tone and are hypertensive | J Neurosci | 2002 | 22 | 10801-10 |
| 104 | Giros B, Jaber M, Jones SR, Wightman RM, Caron MG | Hyperlocomotion and indifference to cocaine and amphetamine in mice lacking the dopamine transporter | Nature | 1996 | 379 | 606-12 |
| 105 | Rocha BA, Fumagalli F, Gainetdinov RR, et al | Cocaine self-administration in dopamine-transporter knockout mice | Nat Neurosci | 1998 | 1 | 132-7 |
| 106 | Spielewoy C, Roubert C, Hamon M, Nosten-Bertrand M, Betancur C, Giros B | Behavioural disturbances associated with hyperdopaminergia in dopamine-transporter knockout mice | Behav Pharmacol | 2000 | 11 | 279-90 |
| 107 | Budygin EA, John CE, Mateo Y, Jones SR | Lack of cocaine effect on dopamine clearance in the core and shell of the nucleus accumbens of dopamine transporter knock-out mice | J Neurosci | 2002 | 22 | RC222 |
| 108 | Amalric M, Koob GF | Functionally selective neurochemical afferents and efferents of the mesocorticolimbic and nigrostriatal dopamine system | Prog Brain Res | 1993 | 99 | 209-26 |
| 109 | Koob GF, Le HT, Creese I | The D1 dopamine receptor antagonist SCH 23390 increases cocaine self-administration in the rat | Neurosci Lett | 1987 | 79 | 315-20 |
| 110 | Bjijou Y, Stinus L, Le Moal M, Cador M | Evidence for selective involvement of dopamine D1 receptors of the ventral tegmental area in the behavioral sensitization induced by intra-ventral tegmental area injections of D-amphetamine | J Pharmacol Exp Ther | 1996 | 277 | 1177-87 |
| 111 | Vezina P | D1 dopamine receptor activation is necessary for the induction of sensitization by amphetamine in the ventral tegmental area | J Neurosci | 1996 | 16 | 2411-20 |
| 112 | Xu M, Guo Y, Vorhees CV, Zhang J | Behavioral responses to cocaine and amphetamine administration in mice lacking the dopamine D= receptor | Brain Res | 2000 | 852 | 198-207 |
| 113 | Parkes JD, Dahlitz M | Amphetamine prescription | Sleep | 1993 | 16 | 201-3 |
| 114 | Berridge CW, Stalnaker TA | Relationship between low-dose amphetamine-induced arousal and extracellular norepinephrine and dopamine levels within prefrontal cortex | Synapse | 2002 | 46 | 140-9 |
| 115 | Jones BE, Harper ST, Halaris AE | Effects of locus coeruleus lesions upon cerebral monoamine content, sleep-wakefulness states and the response to amphetamine in the cat | Brain Res | 1977 | 124 | 473-96 |
| 116 | Wisor JP, Nishino S, Sora I, Uhl GH, Mignot E, Edgar DM | Dopaminergic role in stimulant-induced wakefulness | J Neurosci | 2001 | 21 | 1787-94 |
| 117 | Berridge CW, O'Neil J, Wifler K | Amphetamine acts within the medial basal forebrain to initiate and maintain alert waking | Neuroscience | 1999 | 93 | 885-96 |
| 118 | Sarnyai Z, Shaham Y, Heinrichs SC | The role of corticotropin-releasing factor in drug addiction | Pharmacol Rev | 2001 | 53 | 209-43 |
| 119 | Bradbury MJ, Dement WC, Edgar DM | Effects of adrenalectomy and subsequent corticosterone replacement on rat sleep state and EEG power spectra | Am J Physiol | 1998 | 275 | R555-65 |
| 120 | Steiger A | Sleep and the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocortical system | Sleep Med Rev | 2002 | 6 | 125-38 |
| 121 | Gawin FH, Ellinwood EH, Jr | Cocaine and other stimulants. Actions, abuse, and treatment | N Engl J Med | 1988 | 318 | 1173-82 |
| 122 | Kessler RC, Crum RM, Warner LA, Nelson CB, Schulenberg J, Anthony JC | Lifetime co-occurrence of DSM-III-R alcohol abuse and dependence with other psychiatric disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey | Arch Gen Psychiatry | 1997 | 54 | 313-321 |
| 123 | Warner LA, Kessler RC, Hughes M, Anthony JC, Nelson CB | Prevalence and correlates of drug use and dependence in the United States. Results from the National Comorbidity Survey | Arch Gen Psychiatry | 1995 | 52 | 219-29 |
| 124 | Weddington WW, Brown BS, Haertzen CA, et al | Changes in mood, craving, and sleep during short-term abstinence reported by male cocaine addicts. A controlled, residential study | Arch Gen Psychiatry | 1990 | 47 | 861-8 |
| 125 | Griffith J | A study of illicit amphetamine drug traffic in Oklahoma City | Am J Psychiatry | 1966 | 123 | 560-9 |
| 126 | Boivin DB, Montplaisir J, Petit D, Lambert C, Lubin S | Effects of modafinil on symptomatology of human narcolepsy | Clin Neuropharmacol | 1993 | 16 | 46-53 |
| 127 | Billiard M, Besset A, Montplaisir J, et al | Modafinil: a double-blind multicentric study | Sleep | 1994 | 17 | S107-12 |
| 128 | Besset A, Chetrit M, Carlander B, Billiard M | Use of modafinil in the treatment of narcolepsy: a long term follow-up study | Neurophysiol Clin | 1996 | 26 | 60-6 | SLEEP, Vol. 27, No. 6, 2004

| Reference Number | Authors | Title | Journal | Year | Volume | Pages |
|------------------|---------|-------|---------|------|--------|-------|
| 129 | Littner M, Johnson SF, McCall WV, Anderson WM, Davila D, Hartse SK et al. | Practice parameters for the treatment of narcolepsy: an update for 2000 | Sleep | 2001 | 24 | 451-66 |
| 130 | Duteil J, Rambert FA, Pessonnier J, Hermant JF, Gombert R, Assous E. | Central alpha 1-adrenergic stimulation in relation to the behaviour stimulating effect of modafinil; studies with experimental animals | Eur J Pharmacol | 1990 | 180 | 49-58 |
| 131 | Scammell TE, Estabrooke IV, McCarthy MT, et al. | Hypothalamic arousal regions are activated during modafinil-induced wakefulness | J Neurosci | 2000 | 0 | 8620-8 |
| 132 | Akaoka H, Roussel B, Lin JS, Chouvet G, Jouvet M. | Effect of modafinil and amphetamine on the rat catecholaminergic neuron activity | Neurosci Lett | 1991 | 123 | 20-2 |
| 133 | Lin JS, Roussel B, Akaoka H, Fort P, Debilly G, Jouvet M. | Role of catecholamines in the modafinil and amphetamine induced wakefulness, a comparative pharmacological study in the cat | Brain Res | 1992 | 591 | 319-26 |
| 134 | Ferraro L, Antonelli T, O'Connor WT, Tanganelli S, Rambert FA, Fuxe K. | Modafinil: an antinarcoleptic drug with a different neurochemical profile to d-amphetamine and dopamine uptake blockers | Biol Psychiatry | 1997 | 2 | 1181-3 |
| 135 | Jasinski DR, Kovacevic-Ristanovic R. | Evaluation of the abuse liability of modafinil and other drugs for excessive daytime sleepiness associated with narcolepsy | Clin Neuropharmacol | 2000 | 23 | 149-56 |
| 136 | Jasinski DR. | An evaluation of the abuse potential of modafinil using methylphenidate as a reference | J Psychopharmacol | 2000 | 14 | 53-60 |
| 137 | Malcolm R, Book SW, Moak D, DeVane L, Czepowicz V. | Clinical applications of modafinil in stimulant abusers: low abuse potential | Am J Addict | 2002 | 11 | 247-9 |
| 138 | Rush CR, Kelly TH, Hays LR, Wooten AF. | Discriminative-stimulus effects of modafinil in cocaine-trained humans | Drug Alcohol Depend | 2002 | 67 | 311-22 |
| 139 | Bastuji H, Jouvet M. | Successful treatment of idiopathic hypersomnia and narcolepsy with modafinil | Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry | 1988 | 2 | 695-700 |
| 140 | Hermant JF, Rambert FA, Duteil J. | Awakening properties of modafinil: effect on nocturnal activity in monkeys (Macaca mulatta) after acute and repeated administration | Psychopharmacology (Berl) | 1991 | 103 | 28-32 |
| 141 | Bassetti C. | Narcolepsy | Curr Treat Options Neurol | 1999 | 1 | 291-8 |
| 142 | Mitler MM, Harsh J, Hirshkowitz M, Guilleminault C. | Long-term efficacy and safety of modafinil (PROVIGIL(R)) for the treatment of excessive daytime sleepiness associated with narcolepsy | Sleep Med | 2000 | 1 | 231-43 |
| 143 | Wesensten NJ, Belenky G, Kautz MA, Thorne DR, Reichardt RM, Balkin TJ. | Maintaining alertness and performance during sleep deprivation: modafinil versus caffeine | Psychopharmacology (Berl) | 2002 | 59 | 238-47 |
| 144 | De Sereville JE, Boer C, Rambert FA, Duteil J. | Lack of pre-synaptic dopaminergic involvement in modafinil activity in anaesthetized mice: in vivo voltammetry studies | Neuropharmacology | 1994 | 33 | 755-61 |
| 145 | Mignot E, Nishino S, Guilleminault C, Dement WC. | Modafinil binds to the dopamine uptake carrier site with low affinity | Sleep | 1994 | 17 | 436-7 |
| 146 | Lin JS, Hou Y, Jouvet M. | Potential brain neuronal targets for amphetamine-, methylphenidate-, and modafinil-induced wakefulness, evidenced by c-fos immunocytochemistry in the cat | Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A | 1996 | 93 | 14128-33 |
| 147 | Engber TM, Koury EJ, Dennis SA, Miller MS, Contreras PC, Bhat RV. | Differential patterns of regional c-Fos induction in the rat brain by amphetamine and the novel wakefulness-promoting agent modafinil | Neurosci Lett | 1998 | 241 | 95-8 |
| 148 | de Saint HZ, Orosco M, Rouch C, Blanc G, Nicolaidis S. | Variations in extracellular monoamines in the prefrontal cortex and medial |  |  |  |  | SLEEP, Vol. 27, No. 6, 2004

| Reference Number | Authors | Title | Journal | Year | Volume | Pages |
|------------------|---------|-------|---------|------|--------|-------|
| 169 | Berkowitz BA, Spector S | The effect of caffeine and theophylline on the disposition of brain serotonin in the rat | Eur J Pharmacol | 1971 | 16 | 322-5 |
| 170 | Carter AJ, O'Connor WT, Carter MJ, Ungerstedt U | Caffeine enhances acetylcholine release in the hippocampus in vivo by a selective interaction with adenosine A1 receptors | J Pharmacol Exp Ther | 1995 | 273 | 637-42 |
| 171 | Solinas M, Ferre S, You ZB, Karcz-Kubicha M, Popoli P, Goldberg SR | Caffeine induces dopamine and glutamate release in the shell of the nucleus accumbens | J Neurosci | 2002 | 22 | 6321-4 |
| 172 | Swerdlow NR, Vaccarino FJ, Amalric M, Koob GF | The neural substrates for the motor-activating properties of psychostimulants: a review of recent findings | Pharmacol Biochem Behav | 1986 | 25 | 233-48 |
| 173 | Swerdlow NR, Vaccarino FJ, Koob GF | Effects of naloxone on heroin-, amphetamine- and caffeine-stimulated locomotor activity in the rat | Pharmacol Biochem Behav | 1985 | 23 | 499-501 |
| 174 | Swerdlow NR, Koob GF | Separate neural substrates of the locomotor-activating properties of amphetamine, heroin, caffeine and corticotropin releasing factor (CRF) in the rat | Pharmacol Biochem Behav | 1985 | 23 | 303-7 |
| 175 | Goodman RR, Kuhar MJ, Hester L, Snyder SH | Adenosine receptors: autoradiographic evidence for their location on axon terminals of excitatory neurons | Science | 1983 | 220 | 967-9 |
| 176 | Fastbom J, Pazos A, Probst A, Palacios JM | Adenosine A1 receptors in the human brain: a quantitative autoradiographic study | Neuroscience | 1987 | 22 | 827-39 |
| 177 | Ferre S, Popoli P, Tinner-Staines B, Fuxe K | Adenosine A1 receptor-dopamine D1 receptor interaction in the rat limbic system: modulation of dopamine D1 receptor antagonist binding sites | Neurosci Lett | 1996 | 208 | 109-12 |
| 178 | Fink JS, Weaver DR, Rivkees SA, Peterfreund RA, Pollack AE, Adler EM et al | Molecular cloning of the rat A2 adenosine receptor: selective co-expression with D2 dopamine receptors in rat striatum | Brain Res Mol Brain Res | 1992 | 14 | 186-95 |
| 179 | Svenningsson P, Le Moine C, Kull B, Sunahara R, Bloch B, Fredholm BB | Cellular expression of adenosine A2A receptor messenger RNA in the rat central nervous system with special reference to dopamine innervated areas | Neuroscience | 1997 | 80 | 1171-85 |
| 180 | Diaz-Cabiale Z, Hurd Y, Guidolin D et al | Adenosine A2A agonist CGS 21680 decreases the affinity of dopamine D2 receptors for dopamine in human striatum | Neuroreport | 2001 | 12 | 1831-4 |
| 181 | Stromberg I, Popoli P, Muller CE, Ferre S, Fuxe K | Electrophysiological and behavioural evidence for an antagonistic modulatory role of adenosine A2A receptors in dopamine D2 receptor regulation in the rat dopamine-denervated striatum | Eur J Neurosci | 2000 | 12 | 4033-7 |
| 182 | Ferre S, von Euler G, Johansson B, Fredholm BB, Fuxe K | Stimulation of high-affinity adenosine A2 receptors decreases the affinity of dopamine D2 receptors in rat striatal membranes | Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A | 1991 | 88 | 7238-41 |
| 183 | Ferre S, O'Connor WT, Fuxe K, Ungerstedt U | The striopallidal neuron: a main locus for adenosine-dopamine interactions in the brain | J Neurosci | 1993 | 13 | 5402-6 |
| 184 | Jin S, Johansson B, Fredholm BB | Effects of adenosine A1 and A2 receptor activation on electrically evoked dopamine and acetylcholine release from rat striatal slices | J Pharmacol Exp Ther | 1993 | 267 | 801-8 |
| 185 | Greden JF, Procter A, Victor B | Caffeinism associated with greater use of other psychotropic agents | Compr Psychiatry | 1981 | 22 | 565-71 |
| 186 | Benowitz NL | Clinical pharmacology of caffeine | Annu Rev Med | 1990 | 41 | 277-88 |
| 187 | Victor BS, Lubetsky M, Greden JF | Somatic manifestations of caffeinism | J Clin Psychiatry | 1981 | 42 | 185-8 |
| 188 | Stillner V, Popkin MK, Pierce CM | Caffeine-induced delirium during prolonged competitive stress | Am J Psychiatry | 1978 | 135 | 855-6 |
| 189 | Sours JA | Case reports of anorexia nervosa and caffeinism | Am J Psychiatry | 1983 | 140 | 235-6 |
| 190 | Alstott RL, Miller AJ, Forney RB | Report of a human fatality due to caffeine | J Forensic Sci | 1973 | 18 | 135-7 |
| 191 | Bryant J | Suicide by ingestion of caffeine | Arch Pathol Lab Med | 1981 | 105 | 685-6 |
| 192 | Curatolo PW, Robertson D | The health consequences of caffeine | Ann Intern Med | 1983 | 98 | 641-53 |
| 193 | Jokela S, Vartiainen A | Caffeine poisoning | Acta Pharmacol Toxicol (Copenh) | 1959 | 15 | 331-4 |
| 194 | McGee MB | Caffeine poisoning in a 19-year-old female | J Forensic Sci | 1980 | 5 | 29-32 |
| 195 | Stolerman IP, Jarvis MJ | The scientific case that nicotine is addictive | Psychopharmacology (Berl) | 1995 | 117 | 2-10 |
| 196 | Kenny PJ, Markou A | Neurobiology of the nicotine withdrawal syndrome | Pharmacol Biochem Behav | 2001 | 70 | 531-49 |
| 197 | Knott VJ, Harr A, Ilivitsky V, Mahoney C | The cholinergic basis of the smoking-induced EEG activation profile | Neuropsychobiology | 1998 | 38 | 97-107 |
| 198 | Rusted JM, Caulfield D, King L, Goode A | Moving out of the laboratory: does nicotine improve everyday attention? | Behav Pharmacol | 2000 | 1 | 621-9 |
| 199 | Phillips BA, Danner FJ | Cigarette smoking and sleep disturbance | Arch Intern Med | 1995 | 155 | 734-7 |
| 200 | Wetter DW, Fiore MC, Baker TB, Young TB | Tobacco withdrawal and nicotine replacement influence objective measures of sleep | J Consult Clin Psychol | 1995 | 63 | 658-67 |
| 201 | Wetter DW, Young TB | The relation between cigarette smoking and sleep disturbance | Prev Med | 1994 | 23 | 328-34 |
| 202 | Knott VJ | Dynamic EEG changes during cigarette smoking | Neuropsychobiology | 1988 | 19 | 54-60 |
| 203 | Rieder A, Kunze U, Groman E, Kiefer I, Schoberberger R | Nocturnal sleep-disturbing nicotine craving: a newly described symptom of extreme nicotine dependence | Acta Med Austriaca | 2001 | 28 | 21-2 |
| 204 | Davila DG, Hurt RD, Offord KP, Harris CD, Shepard JW, Jr | Acute effects of transdermal nicotine on sleep architecture, snoring, and sleep-disordered breathing in nonsmokers | Am J Respir Crit Care Med | 1994 | 150 | 469-74 |
| 205 | Salin-Pascual RJ, Moro-Lopez ML, Gonzalez-Sanchez H, Blanco-Centurion C | Changes in sleep after acute and repeated administration of nicotine in the rat | Psychopharmacology (Berl) | 1999 | 145 | 133-8 |
| 206 | Yu ZJ, Wecker L | Chronic nicotine administration differentially affects neurotransmitter release from rat striatal slices | J Neurochem | 1994 | 63 | 186-94 |
| 207 | Andersson K, Siegel R, Fuxe K, Eneroth P | Intravenous injections of nicotine induce very rapid and discrete reductions of hypothalamic catecholamine levels associated with increases of ACTH, vasopressin and prolactin secretion | Acta Physiol Scand | 1983 | 118 | 35-40 |
| 208 | Cam GR, Bassett JR, Cairncross KD | The action of nicotine on the pituitary-adrenal cortical axis | Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther | 1979 | 237 | 49-66 |
| 209 | Gilbert DG, Meliska CJ, Williams CL, Jensen RA | Subjective correlates of cigarette-smoking-induced elevations of peripheral beta-endorphin and cortisol | Psychopharmacology (Berl) | 1992 | 106 | 275-81 |
| 210 | Kirschbaum C, Wust S, Strasburger CJ | 'Normal' cigarette smoking increases free cortisol in habitual smokers | Life Sci | 1992 | 50 | 435-42 |
| 211 | Clarke PB, Fu DS, Jakubovic A, Fibiger HC | Evidence that mesolimbic dopaminergic activation underlies the locomotor stimulant action of nicotine in rats | J Pharmacol Exp Ther | 1988 | 246 | 701-8 | SLEEP, Vol. 27, No. 6, 2004

What Keeps Us Awake—Boutrel and Koob

| Reference | Title                                                                                          |
|-----------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 212       | Effect of ventral tegmental 6-hydroxy-dopamine lesions on the locomotor stimulant action of nicotine in rats. Neuropharmacology 1998;37:1503-13. |
| 213       | Nicotine-induced behavioral sensitization is associated with extracellular dopamine release and expression of c-Fos in the striatum and nucleus accumbens of the rat. Behav Brain Res 2001;121:137-47. |
| 214       | Locomotor activity in rats after administration of nicotinic agonists intracerebrally. Br J Pharmacol 1990;99:273-8. |
| 215       | Effects of nicotine in the dopaminergic system of mice lacking the alpha4 subunit of neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Eur J Neurosci 2003;17:1329-37. |
| 216       | Evidence for an involvement of D1 and D2 dopamine receptors in mediating nicotine-induced hyperactivity in rats. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 1991;104:343-50. |
| 217       | Treatment of narcolepsy with gamma-hydroxybutyrate. A review of clinical and sleep laboratory findings. Sleep 1986;9:285-9. |
| 218       | The effects of gamma-hydroxybutyrate on sleep. Biol Psychiatry 1977;12:273-88. |
| 219       | Pharmacokinetics of gammahydroxybutyrate (GHB) in narcoleptic patients. Sleep 1998;21:507-14. |
| 220       | Gammahydroxybutyrate and narcolepsy: a double-blind placebo-controlled study. Sleep 1993;16:216-20. |
| 221       | The effect of gamma-hydroxybutyrate on nocturnal and diurnal sleep of normal subjects: further considerations on REM sleep-triggering mechanisms. Sleep 1990;13:24-30. |
| 222       | The effects of gamma-hydroxybutyrate on the sleep of narcolepsy patients: a double-blind study. Sleep 1990;13:479-90. |
| 223       | Gamma-hydroxybutyric acid: an endogenous neuromodulator with abuse potential? Trends Pharmacol Sci 1999; 0:135-41. |
| 224       | From the street to the brain: neurobiology of the recreational drug gamma-hydroxybutyric acid. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2004; 5:29-34. |
| 225       | Pathway-specific action of gamma-hydroxybutyric acid in sensory thalamus and its relevance to absence seizures. J Neurosci 2003;23:11469-78. |
| 226       | Pharmacological aspects of human and canine narcolepsy. Prog Neurobiol 1997;52:27-78. |
| 227       | Involvement of histaminergic neurons in arousal mechanisms demonstrated with H3-receptor ligands in the cat. Brain Res 1990;523:325-30. |
| 228       | Sleep and waking during acute histamine H3 agonist BP 2.94 or H3 antagonist carboperamide (MR 16155) administration in rats. Neuropsychopharmacology 1996;15:31-5. |
| 229       | Effects of selective activation or blockade of the histamine H3 receptor on sleep and wakefulness. Eur J Pharmacol 1991;205:283-7. |
| 230       | H3 receptor blockade by thioperamide enhances cognition in rats without inducing locomotor sensitization. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 2003;167:363-72. |
| 231       | Waking selective neurons in the posterior hypothalamus and their response to histamine H3-receptor ligands: an electrophysiological study in freely moving cats. Behav Brain Res 2003;144:227-41. | 