practice applications

EDITOR’S OUTLOOK

This month as we pause to give thanks, the Journal would also like to express its gratitude. We are grateful for the food and nutrition professionals who give of themselves to people and causes well beyond the call of duty in order to bring good nutrition to those who might not otherwise find it.

This month’s Outlook is devoted to Ruth Dow, PhD, RD, FADA, professor emerita at the School of Family and Consumer Science, Eastern Illinois University. For almost 30 years, Ruth taught undergraduate and graduate courses in nutrition and directed the graduate dietetics program, which later evolved into a dietetic internship.

In 1983, Dow and her husband, Chuck, took a mission trip to Mexico that kindled interest in public health and community service. She has worked in Latin American and African countries ever since as a volunteer with Alfalit International, Inc, an international, interdenominational Christian literacy organization. Alfalit focuses on community development by providing literacy and basic education for adults, preschool through primary education for children, and nutrition and health programs, all designed to enhance the quality of life for those with limited resources. From 1987-1998, Ruth spent 5 weeks every summer working as a dedicated volunteer, and since retirement she and her husband have devoted considerably more time in this capacity.

As director of nutrition for Alfalit for the past 18 years, Ruth has addressed the many challenges of public health nutrition. She has often discovered that available nutritious foods are underutilized by community residents; therefore, education on preparation of these foods is often the focus of her nutrition presentations. Ruth has also developed most of the teaching materials herself. Having learned Spanish over the years, Ruth has written nutrition booklets in Spanish, presented on numerous radio and TV programs, and created videos and DVDs. The focus is always helping others make the best use of the foods they have to feed their families—selecting options with the available budget. A novel hallmark of this nutrition education is the use of the solar cooker. Made simply with a cardboard box lined with aluminum foil, this $1 tool helps reduce fuel costs as well as removing noxious smoke from inside the houses as well as reducing deforestation and subsequent soil erosion. “The health, economic, and environmental impacts can be significant—if the cookers are used frequently when there is a strong sun,” says Ruth.

When implementing a nutrition program for the first time, Ruth learns the lifestyle, interests, and needs of a community through the local media, its residents, Alfalit staff, and other educators. “When possible, we stay with families in the communities where we teach, which provides valuable opportunities to interact, observe, and learn about foods, culture, customs, and language,” she explains. Programs vary from 30-minute highly interactive sessions for preschoolers with puppets, an illustrated story, food models, or real foods, to a 1-week, 40-hour certificate course, and everything in between, including education for cooks, dining centers, schools, churches, and more formal presentations for hospital professional staff, nursing students, university nutrition students, and education and other students and faculty.

Ruth believes that her upbringing fueled her passion to serve others. Her nutrition and education skills, developed at Eastern Illinois University, along with a sense of creativity, flexibility, and imagination, enable her to teach and direct countless nutrition programs effectively. “My greatest joy is being able to learn, grow, and help people at the university, in the profession, and in a variety of international settings improve their health through better nutrition.”

Thank you, Ruth, for your dedication and inspiration from all of us in the profession. 