Environment International 155 (2021) 106660

Associations of urine metals and metal mixtures during pregnancy with cord serum vitamin D Levels: A prospective cohort study with repeated measurements of maternal urinary metal concentrations

Keywords:
Newborns’ vitamin D status
Urine metals
Mixtures
Repeated measurements

Background: Vitamin D deficiency has been associated with the increased risk of many diseases, especially during early life. Exposure to some toxic metals may decrease vitamin D levels in adults and children in previous studies. However, less is known about the associations of maternal metals exposure during pregnancy with newborns’ vitamin D status.
Objective: We conducted a prospective cohort study to investigate the relationships between urine metals and metal mixtures during pregnancy and newborns’ vitamin D status.
Methods: Urine samples of 598 pregnant women were collected in each trimester and cord blood samples of newborns were collected at delivery. The concentrations of 20 metals in urine and 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] in cord serum were quantified. Generalized linear models were used to estimate the associations between individual metals and cord serum total 25(OH)D. We applied Bayesian Kernel Machine Regression (BKMR) to evaluate the mixture and interaction effects of urine metals.
Results: In individual metals analyses, we reported that a double increase in urine vanadium (V), cobalt (Co), and thallium (Tl) throughout pregnancy was associated with a 9.91% [95% confidence interval (CI): 18.58%, 0.30%], 11.42% (95% CI: 17.73%, 4.63%), and 12.64% (95% CI: 21.44%, 2.86%) decrease in cord serum total 25(OH)D, respectively. Exposures to the three metals during the whole pregnancy were also correlated to increased odds for newborns’ vitamin D deficiency (<20 ng/mL) [odds ratio (95% CI): 1.80 (1.05, 3.10) for V, 1.88 (1.25, 2.82) for Co, and 1.90 (1.07, 3.38) for Tl]. BKMR analyses revealed a negative influence of metal mixtures (V+Co+Tl) on neonatal vitamin D status, as well as potential synergism between V and Co and between V and Tl.
Conclusions: Our study provides evidence of negative impacts of maternal exposure to V, Co, and Tl during pregnancy on cord serum vitamin D levels at delivery. Potential synergism between V and Co and between V and Tl existed in their associations with cord serum total 25(OH)D.

1. Introduction
Vitamin D is necessary for human health due to its critical role in enhancing calcium and phosphorus absorption and regulating bone metabolism. The extra-skeletal effects of vitamin D have also been emphasized in a number of studies, which is involved in a wide variety of medical conditions, such as immunological diseases, cancers, neurologic diseases, and cardiovascular diseases. Recently, there has been growing concern for health effects of vitamin D insufficiency/deficiency during early life. A series of epidemiological studies have demonstrated that decreased cord blood vitamin D levels at delivery may be related to increased risks of childhood respiratory tract infections, asthma and wheeze, allergic diseases, neurocognitive impairment, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder symptoms, elevated blood pressure, and diabetes. Since the fetus relies totally on the mother for vitamin D through the cord blood supply, maintaining adequate vitamin D during pregnancy is not only essential to maternal health but also vital to normal growth and development of the fetus, even to the health of the baby after delivery for a long time.

The vitamin D is mainly generated in the skin after sunlight exposure, and can also be provided from daily diet or dietary supplements. The vitamin D obtained by the ways mentioned above includes two forms: vitamin D3 and vitamin D2, both of which are inactive and need to undergo the following metabolism. The first hydroxylation occurs in the liver, where vitamin D3 or D2 are converted to 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D]. Then further hydroxylation takes place in the kidney, where 25(OH)D is transformed into 1,25(OH)2D, the only active metabolite of vitamin D. Compared to the tightly regulated 1,25(OH)2D, the prohormone 25(OH)D has a longer half-life (about 2–3 weeks) and is more plentiful in human circulating blood, which makes it the best indicator of vitamin D status. The cord blood 25(OH)D at delivery is also identified as a reliable biomarker of fetal intra-uterine vitamin D levels and newborn’s vitamin D status due to the evidence that strong positive correlation between maternal 25(OH)D concentrations and cord blood 25(OH)D levels.

A lot of factors can influence maternal vitamin D levels and thereby affect fetal or neonatal vitamin D status, including genetics, age, obesity, vitamin D intake, several chronic illnesses (chronic liver/kidney disease, Crohn’s disease, etc.), as well as sunlight exposure variation caused by the difference of latitude, season, skin pigmentation, clothing, sunscreen use and outdoor activity. Environmental pollutants are also suggested to be able to interfere with human vitamin D endocrine systems. In view of the potential role of metallic pollutants in endocrine disruption and their ubiquity in the environment, it is necessary to investigate the influences of exposure to metals on human vitamin D status, especially in susceptible populations.

A few population-based studies have indicated that exposure to toxic metals, including lead (Pb) and cadmium (Cd), may have negative impacts on vitamin D status in adults and children, which mainly focused on single metal exposure. We are not aware of any epidemiological studies that have estimated the relationships between maternal multiple metals exposure during pregnancy and neonatal vitamin D status. Therefore, we carried out a prospective cohort study with repeated measurements of urinary metal concentrations to assess the levels of maternal exposure to 20 metals during pregnancy, including Pb, Cd, aluminium (Al), vanadium (V), chromium (Cr), manganese (Mn), cobalt (Co), nickel (Ni), copper (Cu), zinc (Zn), arsenic (As), selenium (Se), rubidium (Rb), strontium (Sr), argentum (Ag), caesium (Cs), barium (Ba), thallium (Tl), thorium (Th) and uranium (U). We attempted to reveal the associations of these metals and metal mixtures with cord blood total 25(OH)D.

## 2. Materials and methods

### 2.1. Study population

The participants of the current study were drawn from an ongoing prospective prenatal cohort study that was carried out at Wuhan Children’s Hospital in Hubei Province, China. The pregnant women were recruited if they met the following criteria: 1) in early gestation (<16 weeks) and with a singleton pregnancy; 2) residing in Wuhan city and intending to receive prenatal check-ups and give birth to babies at the study hospital; 3) willing to donate urine and blood samples and finish questionnaires. Between June 2014 and March 2015, there were 831 healthy pregnant women who donated three complete urine samples during pregnancy (one sample in each trimester), 599 of whom had cord blood samples available for vitamin D measurement. One participant with missing value in annual family income was excluded, leaving 598 mother-newborn pairs for further analyses. All participants had signed informed consents at enrolment. The ethics committees of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, and the Wuhan Women and Children Medical and Healthcare Center both had approved the study protocol.

### 2.2. Urine collection and analysis

Spot urine samples of participants were collected at the first (13.1±1.1 weeks), second (23.7±3.3 weeks), and third (36.2±2.9 weeks) trimester of gestation. All urine samples were collected during working hours (8:00~11:00, 14:00~17:00). Moreover, due to many prenatal examinations were conducted in the morning, most urine samples were collected during 8:00~11:00. We stored urine samples at -20 ◦C before analysis. Urinary concentrations of Al, V, Cr, Mn, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, As, Se, Rb, Sr, Ag, Cd, Cs, Ba, Tl, Pb, Th and U were determined simultaneously using an inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS; Agilent 7700, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Details about analytical methods and laboratory quality controls were reported elsewhere. In brief, we first thawed all urine samples at room temperature. After being acidified overnight by 1.2% HNO3, urine samples were sonicated using ultrasound at 40 ◦C for one hour; then urine metals were analysed in helium mode. Urine samples from one mother were prepared and assessed in the same batch. To assess the accuracy of the measurements, an external quality control sample (SRM2670a, the standard reference material of human urine from National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) was added to each batch. The concentrations of related metals in quality control samples were within the certified range. A blank sample (contain 1.2% HNO3 only) was processed and analysed in every batch to control for possible contamination. The spike recovery values of urinary metals ranged from 91.45% to 106.74%. The intra-assay and inter-assay coefficients of variation were 0.29%~1.64% and 0.05%~3.58%, respectively. The limit of detections (LODs) for these metals varied from 0.0002 to 0.3053 μg/L. The detection rates (DRs) for most metals were over 95%, except Th (91.64%) and Ag (72.35%) (see Table S1). Urinary creatinine concentrations were quantified using a creatinine kit as the indicator of spot urine samples dilution. The concentrations of adjusted metal were presented as μg/g creatinine finally.

### 2.3. Cord blood collection and vitamin D measurements

Cord blood samples of newborns were collected immediately after delivery. Then cord serum was separated by centrifugation, stored in 1.5 mL plastic microtubes and frozen at -80◦C for further research. The concentrations of 25(OH)D2 and 25(OH)D3 in cord serum were analysed X. Fang et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106660

simultaneously using a Waters e2695 series liquid chromatography
system coupled to a XEVO TQD triple quadrupole mass spectrometer
(LC-MS/MS) (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). For quality control, blank and
quality control samples were added to each batch of 12 blood samples,
and the concentrations measured in quality control samples were within
the certified range for each analyte. The intra-assay and inter-assay
coefficients of variation were<15%. The LODs were 0.5 ng/mL for 25
(OH)D2, and 1.0 ng/mL for 25(OH)D3. Vitamin D levels were presented
as the concentrations of total 25(OH)D, which were equal to the sum of
concentrations of 25(OH)D2 and 25(OH)D3.

2.4. Covariates
Information on maternal age at delivery, parity, gestational age, date
of birth, mode of delivery and infant sex was obtained from medical
records. Within three days before or after delivery, in-person interviews
were carried out by trained nurses to get participants’ socioeconomic
status (educational level and annual family income, etc.) and lifestyle
habits (active and passive smoking, alcohol consumption, multivitamin
supplements use, etc.). The participants were identified as passive
smokers if they reported second-hand smoke inhalation at home or at
work. Pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI) was calculated using pre-
pregnancy weight (self-reported) and height. According to pre-
pregnancy weight and the weight before delivery, gestational weight
gain was computed. For the present study, nobody was found to smoke
or drink during pregnancy actively, so we didn’t include these two
variables in further analyses. In addition, we divided the season of birth
into two categories [cold (Dec–May)/warm (Jun–Nov)] in consideration
of climatic characteristics (long winter and summer, but short spring and
autumn) and strength/duration of sunlight exposure in Wuhan (Shen
et al. 2020; Weather China, 2021).

2.5. Statistical analysis
We described population characteristics as mean±standard deviation (SD) for continuous variables and frequencies for categorical vari-
ables. The differences in characteristics between included participants
(n = 598) and the whole population (n = 831) were compared using non-
parametric tests or chi-square tests. We examined the difference in cord
serum total 25(OH)D levels by mother-newborn pairs’ characteristics
using an unadjusted generalized linear model. Urinary metal concen-
trations less than LOD were imputed with values of one-half LOD. Then
the distributions of creatinine-corrected urinary metal concentrations
during the whole pregnancy (average concentrations across three tri-
mesters) and each trimester were also analysed. The intraclass correla-
tion coefficients (ICCs) were computed to assess the reproducibility of
urinary metal concentrations during three trimesters. We calculated
Pearson correlation coefficients to examine the pairwise correlations of
different urinary metal concentrations during the whole pregnancy.
Before further analyses, urinary metal concentrations and cord serum
total 25(OH)D levels were natural log-transformed because of their
right-skewed distributions.

Covariates were chosen according to following biological and sta-
tistical considerations: (1) covariates were correlated with maternal or
neonatal vitamin D levels, and urinary metal concentrations in previous
studies; (2) covariates were significantly (p-value<0.1) associated with
cord serum vitamin D levels and urinary metal concentrations in
bivariate analyses. The unadjusted urinary metal concentrations were
included in the analyses and urinary creatinine concentration was added
as a separate covariate. In the end, full models were adjusted for urinary
creatinine concentrations (continuous), maternal age at delivery
(continuous), gestational age (continuous), pre- pregnancy BMI
(underweight, normal, overweight), annual family income (<50,000
Chinese Yuan, 50,000–100,000 Chinese Yuan, >100,000 Chinese Yuan),
passive smoking during pregnancy (yes or no), multivitamin

3 ## Results

### Table 2
The distributions of urinary metal concentrations during pregnancy (n = 598).

| Urinary metals | Whole pregnancya | 1st Trimester | 2nd Trimester | 3rd Trimester | ICCb (95% CI) |
|----------------|------------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|----------------|
| Al             | 40.76 (23.69, 658.65) | 32.18 (5.22, 508.81) | 38.29 (7.23, 685.49) | 0.31 (0.26, 0.36) |
| V              | 1.71 (0.72, 4.07) | 1.29 (0.39, 4.83) | 1.80 (0.68, 4.80) | 0.35 (0.30, 0.40) |
| Cr             | 1.38 (0.55, 5.92) | 0.87 (0.27, 7.43) | 1.22 (0.42, 8.87) | 0.26 (0.22, 0.32) |
| Mn             | 2.61 (0.83, 25.05) | 1.52 (0.29, 26.53) | 2.37 (0.54, 28.18) | 0.38 (0.33, 0.43) |
| Co             | 0.84 (0.38, 2.03) | 0.35 (0.14, 2.55) | 0.73 (0.25, 3.43) | 0.25 (0.20, 0.30) |
| Ni             | 3.82 (1.51, 16.87) | 2.38 (0.51, 15.97) | 3.31 (0.86, 16.32) | 0.27 (0.22, 0.33) |
| Cu             | 14.71 (7.69, 34.26) | 10.31 (4.37, 24.72) | 14.20 (6.27, 33.90) | 0.53 (0.48, 0.57) |
| Zn             | 332.86 (142.96, 794.52) | 237.39 (83.00, 730.44) | 278.17 (94.56, 836.76) | 0.32 (0.27, 0.37) |
| As             | 24.98 (14.66, 64.58) | 20.05 (9.90, 58.44) | 24.14 (12.11, 71.69) | 0.17 (0.13, 0.23) |
| Se             | 17.75 (12.38, 30.90) | 16.01 (10.78, 26.08) | 17.99 (11.68, 32.06) | 0.43 (0.38, 0.48) |
| Rb             | 1878.31 (1308.50, 2945.12) | 1674.75 (991.75, 2894.54) | 2005.09 (1212.84, 3549.03) | 0.19 (0.14, 0.25) |
| Sr             | 239.70 (96.42, 505.20) | 203.13 (62.72, 528.28) | 225.32 (75.93, 606.21) | 0.29 (0.24, 0.35) |
| Ag             | 0.12 (0.02, 0.47) | 0.07 (<LOD) | 0.10 (<LOD) | 0.09 (0.24) |
| Cd             | 0.79 (0.38, 1.70) | 0.68 (0.31, 1.91) | 0.76 (0.33, 2.10) | 0.48 (0.43, 0.53) |
| Cs             | 10.29 (5.55, 15.72) | 9.89 (5.86, 16.41) | 10.42 (6.41, 17.20) | 0.23 (0.18, 0.28) |
| Ba             | 12.85 (1.21, 116.63) | 7.65 (1.21, 67.04) | 11.18 (1.79, 139.52) | 0.34 (0.29, 0.39) |
| Tl             | 0.54 (0.18, 1.02) | 0.43 (0.18, 0.96) | 0.59 (0.29, 1.11) | 0.19 (0.15, 0.25) |
| Pb             | 3.64 (1.34, 13.84) | 3.02 (1.34, 16.23) | 3.59 (1.61, 16.93) | 0.38 (0.33, 0.44) |
| Th             | 0.17 (<LOD) | 0.09 (<LOD) | 0.11 (<LOD) | 0.10 (0.18) |
| U              | 0.08 (0.01, 0.29) | 0.05 (0.01, 0.40) | 0.07 (0.01, 0.38) | 0.29 (0.24, 0.34) |

Note: P, percentile; 1st, the first; 2nd, the second; 3rd, the third; ICC, intraclass correlation coefficient; CI, confidence interval; LOD, limit of detection; Al, Aluminium; V, Vanadium; Cr, Chromium; Mn, Manganese; Co, Cobalt; Ni, Nickel; Cu, Copper; Zn, Zinc; As, Arsenic; Se, Selenium; Rb, Rubidium; Sr, Strontium; Ag, Argentum; Cd, Cadmium; Cs, Caesium; Ba, Barium; Tl, Thallium; Pb, Lead; Th, Thorium; U, Uranium.

a Average concentrations across different trimesters.
b Intraclass correlation coefficient of metal concentrations in different trimesters. weight (18.5≤BMI<24 kg/m2), 81.94% were highly educated (more than high school), 83.61% had annual family income>50,000 Chinese Yuan, 83.95% were nulliparous, 2.01% smoked actively before pregnancy, and 33.95% were passive smokers prior to pregnancy. During pregnancy, the mean weight gain of mothers was 39.33±1.19 kg, and most of the mothers used multivitamin supplements (89.97%) and did not expose to second-hand smoking (66.05%). Of the newborns, the mean gestational age was 39.33±1.19 weeks, 55.02% were born in cold season, 57.02% were derived by caesarean section, and 55.52% were male. The median value (interquartile range) of cord serum 25(OH)D concentrations was 16.81 (16.76) ng/mL. Significantly lower cord serum total 25(OH)D concentrations were observed among mothers who had low annual family income (<50,000 Chinese Yuan) in comparison with those who were with high annual family income (>100,000 Chinese Yuan), among mothers who did not use multivitamin supplements in comparison with those who used multivitamin supplements, among mothers who were passive smokers in comparison with those who were not exposed to second-hand smoking, and among newborns who were delivered in cold season (Dec–May) in comparison with warm season (Jun–Nov).

3.2. Distribution of urinary metal concentrations

Table 2 shows the distributions of concentrations of 20 urine metals during pregnancy. Median values of averaged urinary metals concentrations throughout the entire pregnancy varied from 0.08 to 1878.31 μg/g creatinine. Except Cd (ICC = 0.48) and Cu (ICC = 0.53), the ICCs of other metals were between 0.17 and 0.43 across three trimesters. The Spearmen correlations between metals throughout pregnancy were weak to moderate (r = 0.15~0.74) (see Table S3).

3.3. Individual metals and newborns’ vitamin D status

Results from single-metal models are reported in Table S4. After FDR correction, we found that per doubling of urine V, Co, and Tl throughout pregnancy contributed to an 18.22% [95% confidence interval (CI): 25.57%, 10.14%], 16.19% (95% CI: 21.76%, 10.22%), and 20.57% (95% CI: 27.96%, 12.42%) decrease in cord serum total 25

Table 3
Exposure to metals during the whole pregnancy and newborns’ vitamin D status (multiple-metal model) (n = 598).
| Urinary metals | %Δ (95% CI)a | p-Value | Odds Ratios | p-Value |
|----------------|---------------|---------|--------------|---------|
| V              | 9.91 (18.58, 0.30) | 0.04    | 1.80 (1.05, 3.10) | 0.03    |
| Co             | 11.42 (17.73, 4.63) | 0.001   | 1.88 (1.25, 2.82) | 0.003   |
| Tl             | 12.64 (21.44, 2.86) | 0.01    | 1.90 (1.07, 3.38) | 0.03    |

Note: %Δ, percent differences; CI, confidence interval; V, Vanadium; Co, Cobalt; Tl, Thallium.
a Percent differences in cord serum total 25(OH)D levels associated with each double increase in urinary metal concentrations during the whole pregnancy. Unadjusted average concentrations of metals (vanadium, cobalt, and thallium) across different trimesters were included in the generalized linear model simultaneously, and adjusted for average concentrations of urine creatinine across different trimesters, maternal age at delivery, gestational age, pre-pregnancy BMI, annual family income, active smoking before pregnancy, passive smoking before/during pregnancy, multivitamin supplements use during pregnancy, season of birth, and mode of delivery.
b Odds ratios of newborns’ vitamin D deficiency (<20 ng/mL) associated with each natural log-transformed unit increase in urinary metal concentrations during the whole pregnancy. Unadjusted average concentrations of metals (vanadium, cobalt, and thallium) across different trimesters were included in logistic regression model simultaneously, and adjusted for the same variables mentioned above.
(OH)D, respectively. Table 3 presents the results from multiple-metal model. After accounting for the other metals, we observed that each double increase in urinary concentrations of V, Co, and Tl during the whole pregnancy was respectively linked to a 9.91% (95% CI: 18.58%, 0.30%), 11.42% (95% CI: 17,73%, 4.63%), and 12.64% (95% CI: 21.44%, 2.86%) decrease in cord serum total 25(OH)D levels. The trimester-specific analysis also showed significant inverse associations in the first [percent difference (%Δ) = 9.25; 95% CI: 16.95, 0.83] and second [percent difference (%Δ) = 10.04; 95% CI: 17.84, 1.49] trimester for V, and in the third trimester for Co [percent difference (%Δ) = 9.23; 95% CI: 14.24, 3.93] and Tl [percent difference (%Δ) = 7.68; 95% CI: 14.72, 0.07] (see Table S5). Spline regression analysis suggested that the associations of averaged urinary V/Co/Tl concentrations across three trimesters with cord serum total 25(OH)D levels were nearly linear (p-values = 0.018, 0.004, and 0.019, respectively, with p-values for nonlinearity of 0.047, 0.342, and 0.215). Additionally, we observed statistically significant linear dose–response relationship in the first trimester (p-value for linear association: 0.047; p-value for nonlinear association: 0.262) for V, and in the third trimester for Co (p-value for linear association: 0.002; p-value for nonlinear association: 0.276) and Tl (p-value for linear association: 0.024; p-value for nonlinear association: 0.080). The suggestive evidence of linear association between urinary concentrations of V in the second trimester and cord serum 25(OH)D levels (p-value for linear association: 0.065; p-value for nonlinear association: 0.754) was also found in this analysis (see Figure S1).
In the analysis of newborns’ vitamin D deficiency (<20 ng/mL), we reported that each natural log-transformed unit increase in urine V, Co, and Tl throughout the entire pregnancy was associated with an 80% ~ 90% increase in the odds of neonatal vitamin D deficiency [odds ratio (OR) = 1.80, 95% CI: 1.05, 3.10 for V; OR = 1.88, 95% CI: 1.25, 2.82 for Co; OR = 1.90, 95% CI: 1.07, 3.38 for Tl] (see Table 3). The trimester-specific analysis suggested that Co exposure in the third trimester was positively associated with newborns’ vitamin D deficiency (OR = 1.55, 95% CI: 1.16, 2.09) (see Table S5).

3.4. Metal mixtures and newborns’ vitamin D status

Fig. 1 displays the estimated joint effect of V, Co, and Tl on cord serum vitamin D levels/newborns’ vitamin D deficiency. We first show the estimated difference in natural log-transformed total 25(OH)D concentration when all of the three metals are fixed to a particular percentile (from the 5th percentile to the 95th percentile), as compared with when these metals are all at the 50th percentile. This overall effect analysis reported a significant negative association between the metal mixtures and total 25(OH)D. Interestingly, the association was found to be nonlinear, where the slope showed a sharp decrease when the concentrations of the three metals were all above the 80th percentile (see Fig. 1A). To investigate the interactions among the three metals, we plotted the bivariate exposure–response functions of them. The Fig. 1B suggests potential synergism between V and Co and between V and Tl in their associations with total 25(OH)D, whereby the negative slope of a given metal becomes steeper at higher levels of another metal. The synergism between V and Co was more pronounced than that between V and Tl. Besides, employing the generalized additive model, we also found significant interaction between V and Co (p-value for interaction = 0.01), suggestive evidence of interaction between V and Tl (p-value for interaction = 0.09), but no interaction between Co and Tl (p-value for interaction = 0.55).
We also observed a significant positive association of the metal mixtures with newborns’ vitamin D deficiency (<20 ng/mL). Additionally, the association was nonlinear, where the slope increased sharply when the concentrations of the three metals were all above the 80th percentile (see Fig. 1C). The potential synergism between V and Co in their associations with neonatal vitamin D deficiency was found in this analysis, whereby the positive slope of V (Co) becomes steeper at Fig. 1. Joint effect of maternal exposure to the metal mixtures during the whole pregnancy on newborns’ vitamin D status evaluated by Bayesian Kernel Machine Regression (BKMR). The model adjusted for average concentrations of urine creatinine across different trimesters, maternal age at delivery, gestational age, pre-pregnancy BMI, annual family income, active smoking before pregnancy, passive smoking before/during pregnancy, multivitamin supplements use during pregnancy, season of birth, and mode of delivery. (A) and (C), overall effect of the metal mixtures (V+Co+Tl). The figure displays estimated differences with 95% credible intervals in natural log-transformed total 25(OH)D concentrations (A)/the risk of neonatal vitamin D deficiency (<20 ng/mL) (C) when all of the three metals are fixed to a particular percentile (from the 5th percentile to the 95th percentile), as compared with when these metals are all at their 50th percentile. (B) and (D), bivariate exposure–response functions. For example, h (V | quantiles of Co) means the association of urinary V concentrations with cord serum total 25(OH)D levels (B)/newborns’ vitamin D deficiency (D) when Co is fixed at either 5th, 50th, or 95th percentile, and Tl is set at the median value; the same explanations are applied to the other panels. Note: V, Vanadium; Co, Cobalt; Tl, Thallium; ln-transformed, natural log-transformed.

higher levels of Co (V) (see Fig. 1D). Using the generalized additive model, we also observed the significant interaction between V and Co (p-value for interaction = 0.004), but not between V and Tl (p-value for interaction = 0.96), and between Co and Tl (p-value for interaction = 0.86).

3.5. Stratified analysis by season of birth

For babies who were born in cold season, per doubling of maternal urinary V, Co, and Tl levels were correlated with 12.11% (95% CI: –22.49%, 0.35%), 11.85% (95% CI: 20.16%, 2.67%), and 14.62% (95% CI: 26.17%, 1.27%) decrease in cord serum total 25(OH)D concentrations, respectively, which appeared to be greater than those among babies who were born in warm season [2.10% (95% CI: 13.98%, 21.19%) for V, 10.14% (95% CI: 19.43%, 0.21%) for Co, and 12.25% (95% CI: 24.54%, 2.05%) for Tl], although no significant effect modification was observed (p-values for interactions were 0.23, 0.77, and 0.65 for V, Co, and Tl, respectively) (see Fig. 2A). Similarly, we found more prominent associations of maternal V and Tl exposure with neonatal vitamin D deficiency among newborns who were born in cold season than those among newborns who were born in warm season, except for Co with similar ORs for neonatal vitamin D deficiency in different seasons (OR: 1.92 vs. 1.11 for V, 1.83 vs. 1.95 for Co, 2.55 vs. 1.46 for Tl). The p-values for interactions of this analysis were 0.34 for V, 0.96 for Co, and 0.15 for Tl (see Fig. 2B). For overall effect analysis, we reported a significant negative relationship between metal mixtures (V+Co+Tl) and total 25(OH)D among babies who were delivered in cold season, but a nonsignificant inverse association among babies who were delivered in warm season (see Fig. 2C). In addition, the positive association of the metal mixtures (V+Co+Tl) with neonatal vitamin D deficiency was significant among babies born in cold season, but nonsignificant among babies born in warm season (see Fig. 2D). In brief, we observed a more pronounced toxic effect of maternal exposure to the three metals during the whole pregnancy on newborns’ vitamin D status among babies who were delivered in cold season. Figure S2 displays the interactions among the three metals in stratified analysis. Particularly, Figure S2A and Figure S2B show the interactions among the three metals in their associations with cord serum vitamin D levels among babies who were born in cold season and in warm season, respectively. The interactions among the three metals in their relationships with newborns’ vitamin D deficiency among babies who were delivered in cold season and in warm season were shown in Figure S2C and Figure S2D, respectively. The synergism between V and Co and between V and Tl remained in stratified analysis, suggesting the robustness of synergism among these metals.

4. Discussion

In this study, we assessed the levels of maternal exposure to 20 metals during pregnancy and evaluated the associations of these metals with cord serum total 25(OH)D among 598 mother-newborn pairs from a prospective cohort in Wuhan, China. Our study revealed that maternal exposure to V, Co, and Tl (as individual metals and in mixtures) during pregnancy were associated with decreased cord serum total 25(OH)D levels and increased risk of neonatal vitamin D deficiency (<20 ng/mL), which seemed to be more pronounced among newborns who were delivered in cold season (Dec–May). BKMR analyses indicated potential synergism between V and Co and between V and Tl in their associations with newborns’ vitamin D status. Several human health studies have examined the associations of metals exposure with vitamin D status. Fig. 2. Maternal exposure to metals during the whole pregnancy and newborns’ vitamin D status, stratified by season of birth. The models adjusted for average concentrations of urine creatinine across different trimesters, maternal age at delivery, gestational age, pre-pregnancy BMI, annual family income, active smoking before pregnancy, passive smoking before/during pregnancy, multivitamin supplements use during pregnancy, and mode of delivery. (A) and (B), the associations of maternal exposure to individual metals (V/Co/Tl) during the whole pregnancy with neonatal vitamin D status among newborns who were delivered in cold season (Dec–May) and warm season (Jun–Nov) based on multiple-metal model. The figure (A) shows estimated percent changes with 95% credible intervals (CIs) in cord serum total 25(OH)D levels for a double increase in urinary metal concentrations. The figure (B) shows estimated odds ratios (ORs) and 95% CIs for neonatal vitamin D deficiency (<20 ng/mL) associated with a natural log-transformed unit increase in urinary metal concentrations. (C) and (D), overall effect of maternal exposure to the metal mixtures (V+Co+Tl) during the whole pregnancy on neonatal vitamin D status among newborns who were delivered in cold season and warm season. The figures display estimated differences with 95% CIs in natural log-transformed total 25(OH)D concentrations (C)/estimated differences with 95% CIs in the risk of neonatal vitamin D deficiency (<20 ng/mL) (D) when all of the three metals are fixed to a particular percentile (from the 5th percentile to the 95th percentile), as compared with when these metals are all at their 50th percentile. Note: V, Vanadium; Co, Cobalt; Tl, Thallium; ln-transformed, natural log-transformed. *P-values<0.05.

In terms of research design, most of them involved single metal exposure. However, humans are simultaneously exposed to multiple metals, of which the levels are usually highly correlated. For example, we observed that urinary V, Co, and Tl concentrations were significantly and positively correlated with each other in our population [the Spearmen correlations were 0.45 between V and Co (p-value<0.01), 0.51 between V and Tl (p-value<0.01), and 0.36 between Co and Tl (p-value<0.01)] (see Table S3). Therefore, we applied multiple-metal models to estimate the relationships between maternal metals exposure and cord serum vitamin D levels, which allowed the statistical significance of a specific metal to be independent of the effect of co-exposure to other metals. Moreover, we evaluated the overall effect of metal mixtures and the potential interactions among metals employing BKMR. This novel statistical approach captured the complexity of joint exposure and displayed the actual size and shape of the exposure–response curves induced by different metal mixtures. On the other hand, the exposure measurements of these prior studies were usually conducted at a single time point due to the cross-sectional design, which might result in the inadequate evaluation of long-term exposure to metals. Indeed, different metals have different half-lives in human body due to their biological metabolism characteristics. For metals with long biological half-lives like Cd, their urinary levels at a single time point can represent the cumulative exposure of several years to decades. But for metals with short biological half-lives, such as V, Co, and Tl (about 1~10 days), single measurement at one time point may not reflect long-term exposure accurately because of their rapid excretion from human body. In this study, we observed high variability for most metals throughout pregnancy, which highlighted the necessity of performing repeated exposure measurements during pregnancy.

As far as we know, only one cross-sectional study to date has focused on the relationship between Tl exposure and human vitamin D status. The study reported that urine Tl was positively associated with 25(OH)D in Mexican adolescents, which was contrary to our findings. The inconsistent results may be explained by the differences in exposure levels and population characteristics. Compared to our pregnant women (median urine Tl concentration: 0.54 μg/g creatinine), the Mexican adolescents had lower levels of Tl exposure (median urine Tl concentration: 0.27 μg/g creatinine), indicating that the toxic effect of Tl might be weak among the Mexican adolescents. In addition, the adolescents were more likely to participate in outdoor activities, during which the environmental Tl exposure as well as sunlight-induced vitamin D synthesis increased, thereby contributing to the positive association of urine Tl and 25(OH)D.

Tl is recognized as an extremely toxic metal. Several studies have demonstrated that environmental exposure to Tl was correlated to various maternal or neonatal complications. Although the underlying mechanisms about the impact of maternal exposure to Tl on cord serum total 25(OH)D are poorly understood, a few possible biological mechanisms may explain the inverse association. The toxicity of Tl may be exerted by inducing oxidative stress, impairing glutathione metabolism, and inhibiting Na+/K+-ATPase activity. Experimental studies have shown that Tl exposure could lead to subcellular organelle membrane (e.g., mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticulum membrane) structural injury in hepatocyte. Mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum of hepatocyte are the main sites of 25(OH)D biosynthesis in the liver. Thus, exposure to Tl may be engaged in destroying mitochondria/endoplasmic reticulum, thereby interfering with 25(OH)D biosynthesis. Besides, Tl exposure is also related to oxidative damage to the placenta, and consequently alters the normal transplacental transfer of 25(OH)D.

V and Co are essential trace elements for human beings, while excessive exposure was associated with some potential adverse health effects during pregnancy. To our knowledge, it is the first cohort study to report the associations of maternal exposure to V/Co with cord serum total 25(OH)D. The potential mechanisms of the relationships between V/Co and 25(OH)D are that excessive V/Co exposure may cause acute or chronic liver damage, which is linked to oxidative stress, thereby resulting in suppression of hydroxylation from vitamin D3/D2 to 25 (OH)D in the liver.

In this study, we observed that the inverse association of metal mixtures (V+Co+Tl) with 25 (OH)D was nonlinear, where the negative slope showed a sharp decrease when the three metals were all at high concentrations (above 80th percentile), which might result from the potential synergism between V and Co and between V and Tl. Our results have suggested that maternal joint exposure to the three metals during pregnancy may have a higher toxic effect on newborns’ vitamin D status, and this should be taken into consideration in future research. Moreover, additional studies are required to confirm these findings and clarify the potential biological mechanisms of synergism between V and Co and between V and Tl.

So far, there is no consensus on cut-off values for vitamin D deficiency. In the current study, we defined neonatal vitamin D deficiency as cord serum total 25(OH)D levels<20 ng/mL according to the Endocrine Society vitamin D guideline, and this definition was widely used in other human health studies. Given the ubiquity of metallic pollutants in the environment and the essential role of vitamin D in newborns’ health, the significant positive associations of the three metals (V/Co/Tl) exposure during pregnancy with newborns’ vitamin D deficiency may imply an important public health problem, which needs more attention.

We found that the impacts of metals exposure (V/Co/Tl) on newborns’ vitamin D status seemed to be more pronounced among babies who were born in cold season. Indeed, compared with cold season, warm season is usually related to more sunlight exposure, leading to higher vitamin D levels in the human body. In this study, we also observed that vitamin D levels in newborns who were delivered in warm season were significantly higher than those in newborns who were delivered in cold season [median values of 25 (OH)D concentrations: 21.86 vs. 13.54 ng/mL] (see Table 1). In addition, considering that this phenomenon might arise from the seasonal differences of metals exposure, we examined the differences in urinary V, Co, and Tl concentrations (natural log-transformed) by the season of birth using t-tests. However, no significant difference in urinary metals concentrations (V/Co/Tl) between the two subgroups was found. Therefore, it is possible that sufficient sunlight exposure in warm season weaken the adverse influence of metals on vitamin D status.

In trimester-specific analyses, the negative relationships between V and cord serum total 25(OH)D were identified in the first and second trimester with more pronounced impacts. Additionally, more significant inverse associations of Co/Tl with cord serum total 25(OH)D were observed in the third trimester. However, in view of the short biological half-lives of the three metals (about 1~10 days), using the concentrations of a single measurement to represent the levels of metals exposure during each trimester may result in exposure misclassification. Further studies with repeated measurements of the three metals during each trimester are required to confirm the sensitive exposure windows.

The median urinary concentrations of Tl in present study (Central China) (whole pregnancy: 0.54 μg/g creatinine, the first trimester: 0.43 μg/g creatinine, the second trimester: 0.59 μg/g creatinine, the third trimester: 0.51 μg/g creatinine, n = 598) were similar to those of pregnant women from Nanjing, Eastern China (the first trimester: about 0.44 μg/g creatinine, n = 244), and Guangzhou, Southern China (the second trimester: 0.53 μg/g creatinine, n = 1789), but higher than those of pregnant women from Hangzhou, Eastern China (the second trimester: 0.30 μg/g creatinine, n = 512), Spain (the first trimester: 0.14 μg/g creatinine, the third trimester: 0.13 μg/g creatinine, n = 489), Australia (the third trimester: 0.38 μg/g creatinine, n = 157), and the United States (the first trimester: about 0.07 μg/g creatinine, n = 262; the third trimester: about 0.13 μg/g creatinine, n = 390). The levels of V exposure in this study population [median urine V concentrations: 1.71 μg/g creatinine (whole pregnancy), 1.29 μg/g creatinine (the first trimester), 1.80 μg/g creatinine (the second trimester), 1.71 μg/g creatinine (the third trimester)] were higher than those of pregnant women from Nanjing, Eastern China [median urine V concentration: about 0.66 μg/g creatinine (the first trimester), n = 244], and Australia [median urine V concentration: 0.15 μg/g creatinine (the third trimester), n = 157]. However, the levels of Co exposure in current study [median urine Co concentrations: 0.84 μg/g creatinine (whole pregnancy), 0.35 μg/g creatinine (the first trimester), 0.73 μg/g creatinine (the second trimester), 1.22 μg/g creatinine (the third trimester)] were similar to or lower than those of pregnant women from Hangzhou, Eastern China [median urine Co concentration: 0.74 μg/g creatinine (the second trimester), n = 512], Mexico [median urine Co concentrations: about 1.23 μg/g creatinine (the third trimester), n = 205]. Australia [median urine Co concentration: 1.17 μg/g creatinine (the third trimester), n = 173], Nanjing, Eastern China [median urine Co concentration: about 0.58 μg/g creatinine (the first trimester), n = 244], Spain [median urine Co concentrations: 0.45 μg/g creatinine (the first trimester), 1.30 μg/g creatinine (the third trimester), n = 391], Greece [median urine Co concentration: about 0.46 μg/g creatinine (the first trimester), n = 176], and the United States [median urine Co concentration: about 0.59 μg/g creatinine (the first trimester), n = 262]. Briefly, our pregnant women were generally with similar or higher levels of Tl/V exposure, but with similar or lower levels of Co exposure than other pregnant women. The relatively high levels of Tl/V exposure and the potential interactions among the three metals (V/Co/Tl) may be the reasons for their stand out influences on cord serum vitamin D levels. Moreover, the regional differences in exposure profiles of the three metals (V/Co/Tl) reinforces the importance of evaluating the impacts of metals exposure on newborns’ vitamin D status among different populations.

Our results were not in line with previous studies regarding the relationship between Pb exposure and 25(OH)D levels in humans. A few studies have indicated that Pb exposure was significantly and negatively correlated to 25(OH)D levels in occupational population and lead-burdened children. However, no significant inverse association of urine Pb with cord serum total 25(OH)D was found in our pregnant women. Another Mexican study of adolescents also observed no association between blood Pb and 25(OH)D. For those occupational population, their levels of Pb exposure (mean urine Pb concentration: 108.03~190.65 μg/L) were much higher than those of our pregnant women (mean urine Pb concentration: about 5.45 μg/L). For those lead-burdened children, their levels of Pb exposure (mean blood Pb concentration: 56.50~541.61 μg/L) were also higher than those of the Mexican adolescents (mean blood Pb concentration: 46.00 μg/L). Therefore, the difference in levels of Pb exposure might result in the inconsistent results of these studies.

A study from England has suggested that exposure to Cd was inversely associated with smelter workers’ vitamin D levels. The significant negative influence of Cd exposure on 25(OH)D was also found in women from Eastern China. Nevertheless, our study has indicated that Cd exposure might not influence 25(OH)D levels significantly, which was consistent with the observations of the Swedish study of women and the Mexican study of adolescents. Compared to British smelter workers and Chinese women (from Eastern China) (median urine Cd concentration: 2.02 μg/L; median blood Cd concentrations: 1.40~3.02 μg/L), our pregnant women (from Central China), Swedish women, and Mexican adolescents had lower levels of Cd exposure (median urine Cd concentrations: 0.22~1.00 μg/L; median blood Cd concentration: 0.24~0.60 μg/L), which might contribute to the heterogeneity of these results. However, the significant inverse association between relatively low levels of Cd exposure [median urine Cd concentration: 0.22 μg/L (at 4.5 years of age), 0.28 μg/L (at 9 years of age)] and 25(OH)D has been observed in Bangladeshi children recently, suggesting that the impact of Cd exposure on 25(OH)D levels warrant further research, especially in susceptible populations.

Our study has some strengths. First, we employed multiple-metal models and BKMR to assess the associations of maternal exposure to multiple metals and metal mixtures with cord serum total 25(OH)D. Second, we evaluated the levels of metals exposure during pregnancy by repeated measurements at three time points in a prospective cohort study, which allowed an accurate estimation for relationships between metals exposure and vitamin D status. Nevertheless, there are some limitations in our study. First, we lacked information about vitamin D intake from daily dietary before and during pregnancy, but studies showed that these intakes were not correlated with cord blood vitamin D levels, possibly due to little vitamin D values in the diet. Second, some covariates were collected retrospectively, including pre-pregnancy BMI and passive smoking prior to pregnancy, which might result in measurement error in the confounders. Third, we evaluated the levels of Pb exposure using urinary concentrations. Compared with urine Pb, blood Pb is considered as a better indicator of Pb exposure. Thus, more sensitive measurements of Pb exposure are required to further confirm the association of Pb with cord blood vitamin D. Finally, although we adjusted for several important confounders, we cannot eliminate the residual caused by other unmeasured factors that may affect vitamin D status, such as time of outdoor activities, sunscreen use, air pollutants, and persistent organic pollutants.

5. Conclusions

In conclusion, our study suggested that maternal exposure to V, Co, and Tl during pregnancy may have negative impacts on cord serum vitamin D levels, thereby contributing to neonatal vitamin D deficiency (<20 ng/mL). Potential synergism between V and Co and between V and Tl existed in their associations with cord serum total 25(OH)D. Baiz, N., Dargent-Molina, P., Wark, J.D., Souberbielle, J.C., Slama, R., Annesi-Maesano, I., 2012. Gestational exposure to urban air pollution related to a decrease in cord blood vitamin d levels. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 97, 4087–4095. Group, E. M.-C.C.S.
Bao, S., Xia, W., Xu, S., Li, Y., Lu, B., Wu, C., Liao, J., Liu, H., Sun, X., Zhou, A., 2020. Multiple metal exposure and platelet counts during pregnancy: A repeated measure study. Environ. Int. 136, 105491.
Barbosa Jr., F., Tanus-Santos, J.E., Gerlach, R.F., Parsons, P.J., 2005. A critical review of biomarkers used for monitoring human exposure to lead: advantages, limitations, and future needs. Environ. Health Perspect. 113, 1669–1674.
Barceloux, D.G., 1999. Vanadium. Journal of toxicology. Clin. Toxicol. 37, 265–278.
Barr, D.B., Wilder, L.C., Caudill, S.P., Gonzalez, A.J., Needham, L.L., Pirkle, J.L., 2005. Urinary creatinine concentrations in the U.S. population: implications for urinary biologic monitoring measurements. Environ. Health Perspect. 113, 192–200.
Barrera-Gómez, J., Basagaña, X., 2015. Models with transformed variables: interpretation and software. Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass) 26, e16–e17.
Bikle, D.D., 2014. Vitamin D metabolism, mechanism of action, and clinical applications. Chem. Biol. 21, 319–329.
Bimonte, V.M., Besharat, Z.M., Antonioni, A., Cella, V., Lenzi, A., Ferretti, E., Migliaccio, S., 2021. The endocrine disruptor cadmium: a new player in the pathophysiology of metabolic diseases. J. Endocrinol. Invest.
Bobb, J.F., Valeri, L., Claus Henn, B., Christiani, D.C., Wright, R.O., Mazumdar, M., Godleski, J.J., Coull, B.A., 2015. Bayesian kernel machine regression for estimating the health effects of multi-pollutant mixtures. Biostatistics (Oxford, England) 16, 493–508.
Bouillon, R., Marcocci, C., Carmeliet, G., Bikle, D., White, J.H., Dawson-Hughes, B., Lips, P., Munns, C.F., Lazaretti-Castro, M., Giustina, A., Bilezikian, J., 2019. Skeletal and Extraskeletal Actions of Vitamin D: Current Evidence and Outstanding Questions. Endocr. Rev. 40, 1109–1151.
Box, V., Cherry, N., Waldron, H.A., Dattani, J., Griffiths, K.D., Hill, F.G., 1981. Plasma vitamin D and blood lead concentrations in Asian children. Lancet (London, England) 2, 373.
Brannon, P.M., Picciano, M.F., 2011. Vitamin D in pregnancy and lactation in humans. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 31, 89–115.
Brot, C., Jorgensen, N.R., Sorensen, O.H., 1999. The influence of smoking on vitamin D status and calcium metabolism. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 53, 920–926.
Butts, S.F., Seifer, D.B., Koelper, N., Senapati, S., Sammel, M.D., Hoofnagle, A.N., Kelly, A., Krawetz, S.A., Santoro, N., Zhang, H., Diamond, M.P., Legro, R.S., 2019. Vitamin D Deficiency Is Associated With Poor Ovarian Stimulation Outcome in PCOS but Not Unexplained Infertility. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 104, 369–378.
Callan, A.C., Hinwood, A.L., Ramalingam, M., Boyce, M., Heyworth, J., McCafferty, P., Odland, J.O., 2013. Maternal exposure to metals–concentrations and predictors of exposure. Environ. Res. 126, 111–117.
Camargo Jr., C.A., Ingham, T., Wickens, K., Thadhani, R.I., Silvers, K.M., Epton, M.J., Town, G.I., Espinola, J.A., Crane, J., 2010. New Zealand, A.; Allergy Cohort Study, G. Vitamin D status of newborns in New Zealand. Br. J. Nutrit. 104, 1051–1057.
Chalkley, S.R., Richmond, J., Barltrop, D., 1998. Measurement of vitamin D3 metabolites in smelter workers exposed to lead and cadmium. Occup. Environ. Med. 55, 446–452.
Chang, L., Liu, X., Shi, H., Dai, W., Wang, H., Jiang, Y., 2014. Association of 25-hydroxyvitamin D with Hb and lead in children: a Chinese population-based study. Public Health Nutr. 17, 827–832.
Chen, C., Zhang, H.J., Zhai, H.L., Chen, Y., Han, B., Li, Q., Xia, F.Z., Wang, N.J., Lu, Y.L., 2020. Association between blood cadmium and vitamin D levels in the Yangtze Plain of China in the context of rapid urbanization. Chin. Med. J. 134, 53–59.
Chen, Y.H., Fu, L., Hao, J.H., Yu, Z., Zhu, P., Wang, H., Xu, Y.Y., Zhang, C., Tao, F.B., Xu, D.X., 2015. Maternal vitamin D deficiency during pregnancy elevates the risks of small for gestational age and low birth weight infants in Chinese population. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 100, 1912–1919.
Cvjetko, P., Cvjetko, I., Pavlica, M., 2010. Thallium toxicity in humans. Arhiv za higijenu rada i toksikologiju 61, 111–119.
Desquilbet, L., Mariotti, F., 2010. Dose-response analyses using restricted cubic spline functions in public health research. Stat. Med. 29, 1037–1057.
Domingo-Relloso, A., Grau-Perez, M., Briongos-Figuero, L., Gomez-Ariza, J.L., Garcia-Barrera, T., Dueñas-Laita, A., Bobb, J.F., Chaves, F.J., Kioumourtzoglou, M.A., Navas-Acien, A., Redon-Mas, J., Martin-Escudero, J.C., Tellez-Plaza, M., 2019. The association of urine metals and metal mixtures with cardiovascular incidence in an adult population from Spain: the Hortega Follow-Up Study. Int. J. Epidemiol. 48, 1839–1849.
Dongre, N.N., Suryakar, A.N., Patil, A.J., Hundekari, I.A., Devarnavadagi, B.B., 2013. Biochemical effects of lead exposure on battery manufacture workers with reference to blood pressure, calcium metabolism and bone mineral density. Indian J. Clin. Biochem.: IJCB 28, 65–70.
Engström, A., Skerving, S., Lidfeldt, J., Burgaz, A., Lundh, T., Samsioe, G., Vahter, M., Akesson, A., 2009. Cadmium-induced bone effect is not mediated via low serum 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D. Environ. Res. 109, 188–192.
Feng, H., Xun, P., Pike, K., Wills, A.K., Chawes, B.L., Bisgaard, H., Cai, W., Wan, Y., He, K., 2017. In utero exposure to 25-hydroxyvitamin D and risk of childhood asthma, wheeze, and respiratory tract infections: A meta-analysis of birth cohort studies. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 139, 1508–1517.
Fort, M., Cosín-Tomás, M., Grimalt, J.O., Querol, X., Casas, M., Sunyer, J., 2014. Assessment of exposure to trace metals in a cohort of pregnant women from an urban center by urine analysis in the first and third trimesters of pregnancy. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 21, 9234–9241.
Fort, M., Grimalt, J.O., Casas, M., Sunyer, J., 2015. Interdependence between urinary cobalt concentrations and hemoglobin levels in pregnant women. Environ. Res. 136, 148–154.
Hinwood, A.L., Stasinska, A., Callan, A.C., Heyworth, J., Ramalingam, M., Boyce, M., McCafferty, P., Odland, J., 2015. Maternal exposure to alkali, alkali earth, transition and other metals: Concentrations and predictors of exposure. Environ. Pollut. 204, 256–263.
Holick, M.F., 2007. Vitamin D deficiency. New England J. Med. 357, 266–281.
Holick, M.F., Binkley, N.C., Bischoff-Ferrari, H.A., Gordon, C.M., Hanley, D.A., Heaney, R.P., Murad, M.H., Weaver, C.M., 2011. Evaluation, treatment, and prevention of vitamin D deficiency: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 96, 1911–1930.
Howe, C.G., Claus Henn, B., Eckel, S.P., Farzan, S.F., Grubbs, B.H., Chavez, T.A., Hodes, T.L., Faham, D., Al-Marayati, L., Lerner, D., Quimby, A., Twogood, S., Richards, M.J., Meeker, J.D., Bastain, T.M., Breton, C.V., 2020. Prenatal Metal Mixtures and Birth Weight for Gestational Age in a Predominately Lower-Income Hispanic Pregnancy Cohort in Los Angeles. Environ. Health Perspectives 128, 117001.
Howe, C.G., Margetaki, K., Vafeiadi, M., Roumeliotaki, T., Karachaliou, M., Kogevinas, M., McConnell, R., Eckel, S.P., Conti, D.V., Kippler, M., Farzan, S.F., Chatzi, L., 2021. Prenatal metal mixtures and child blood pressure in the Rhea mother-child cohort in Greece. Environ. Health: A Global Access Sci. Source 20, 1.
Jiang, M., Li, Y., Zhang, B., Zhou, A., Zheng, T., Qian, Z., Du, X., Zhou, Y., Pan, X., Hu, J., Wu, C., Peng, Y., Liu, W., Zhang, C., Xia, W., Xu, S., 2016. A nested case-control study of prenatal vanadium exposure and low birthweight. Hum. Reproduct. (Oxford, England) 31, 2135–2141.
Jiang, Y., Xia, W., Zhang, B., Pan, X., Liu, W., Jin, S., Huo, W., Liu, H., Peng, Y., Sun, X., Zhang, H., Zhou, A., Xu, S., Li, Y., 2018. Predictors of thallium exposure and its relation with preterm birth. Environ. Pollut. 233, 971–976.
Jin, S., Xia, W., Jiang, Y., Sun, X., Huang, S., Zhang, B., Zhou, A., Zheng, T., Xu, S., Li, Y., 2018. Urinary vanadium concentration in relation to premature rupture of membranes: A birth cohort study. Chemosphere 210, 1035–1041.
Johns, L.E., Ferguson, K.K., Cantonwine, D.E., McElrath, T.F., Mukherjee, B., Meeker, J. D., 2017. Urinary BPA and Phthalate Metabolite Concentrations and Plasma Vitamin D Levels in Pregnant Women: A Repeated Measures Analysis. Environ. Health Perspect. 125, 087026.
Jones, A.P., Palmer, D., Zhang, G., Prescott, S.L., 2012. Cord blood 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 and allergic disease during infancy. Pediatrics 130, e1128–e1135.
Jones, G., 2008. Pharmacokinetics of vitamin D toxicity. Am. J. Clin. Nutrit. 88, 582s–586s.
Karras, S.N., Wagner, C.L., Castracane, V.D., 2018. Understanding vitamin D metabolism in pregnancy: From physiology to pathophysiology and clinical outcomes. Metab. Clin. Exp. 86, 112–123.
Kim, S.S., Meeker, J.D., Carroll, R., Zhao, S., Mourgas, M.J., Richards, M.J., Aung, M., Cantonwine, D.E., McElrath, T.F., Ferguson, K.K., 2018. Urinary trace metals individually and in mixtures in association with preterm birth. Environ. Int. 121, 582–590.
Lewis, R.C., Meeker, J.D., Basu, N., Gauthier, A.M., Cantoral, A., Mercado-García, A., Peterson, K.E., Téllez-Rojo, M.M., Watkins, D.J., 2018. Urinary metal concentrations among mothers and children in a Mexico City birth cohort study. Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health 221, 609–615.
Liang, C.M., Wu, X.Y., Huang, K., Yan, S.Q., Li, Z.J., Xia, X., Pan, W.J., Sheng, J., Tao, Y.R., Xiang, H.Y., Hao, J.H., Wang, Q.N., Tao, F.B., Tong, S.L., 2019. Trace element profiles in pregnant women’s sera and umbilical cord sera and influencing factors: Repeated measurements. Chemosphere 218, 869–878.
Liu, W., Zhang, B., Huang, Z., Pan, X., Chen, X., Hu, C., Liu, H., Jiang, Y., Sun, X., Peng, Y., Xia, W., Xu, S., Li, Y., 2018. Cadmium Body Burden and Gestational Diabetes Mellitus: A Prospective Study. Environ. Health Perspect. 126, 027006.
Luczynska, A., Logan, C., Nieters, A., Elgizouli, M., Schottker, B., Brenner, H., Rothenbacher, D., 2014. Cord blood 25(OH)D levels and the subsequent risk of lower respiratory tract infections in early childhood: the Ulm birth cohort. Eur. J. Epidemiol. 29, 585–594.
Malin Igra, A., Vahter, M., Raqib, R., Kippler, M., 2019. Early-Life Cadmium Exposure and Bone-Related Biomarkers: A Longitudinal Study in Children. Environ. Health Perspect. 127, 37003.
Mazumdar, I., Goswami, K., Ali, M.S., 2017. Status of Serum Calcium, Vitamin D and Parathyroid Hormone and Hematological Indices Among Lead Exposed Jewelry Workers in Dhaka, Bangladesh. Indian J. Clin. Biochem.: IJCB 32, 110–116.
Morales, E., Gascon, M., Martinez, D., Casas, M., Ballester, F., Rodriguez-Bernal, C.L., Ibarluzea, J., Marina, L.S., Espada, M., Goni, F., Vizcaino, E., Grimalt, J.O., Sunyer, J., 2013. Project I Associations between blood persistent organic pollutants and 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 in pregnancy. Environ. Int. 57–58, 34–41.
Mossin, M.H., Aaby, J.B., Dalgård, C., Lykkedegn, S., Christesen, H.T., Bilenberg, N., 2017. Inverse associations between cord vitamin D and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder symptoms: A child cohort study. Aust. New Zealand J. Psychiatry 51, 703–710.
Mousavi, S.E., Amini, H., Heydarpour, P., Amini Chermahini, F., Godderis, L., 2019. Air pollution, environmental chemicals, and smoking may trigger vitamin D deficiency: Evidence and potential mechanisms. Environ. Int. 122, 67–90.
Permenter, M.G., Dennis, W.E., Sutto, T.E., Jackson, D.A., Lewis, J.A., Stallings, J.D., 2013. Exposure to cobalt causes transcriptomic and proteomic changes in two rat liver derived cell lines. PLoS ONE 8, e83751.
Pike, N., 2011. Using false discovery rates for multiple comparisons in ecology and evolution. Methods Ecol. Evol. 2, 278–282.
Qian, X., Li, J., Xu, S., Wan, Y., Li, Y., Jiang, Y., Zhao, H., Zhou, Y., Liao, J., Liu, H., Sun, X., Liu, W., Peng, Y., Hu, C., Zhang, B., Lu, S., Cai, Z., Xia, W, 2019. Prenatal exposure to phthalates and neurocognitive development in children at two years of age. Environ. Int. 131, 105023.
Rivera-Núñez, Z., Ashrap, P., Barrett, E.S., Watkins, D.J., Cathey, A.L., Vélez-Vega, C.M., Rosario, Z., Cordero, J.F., Alshawabkeh, A., Meeker, J.D., 2021. Association of biomarkers of exposure to metals and metalloids with maternal hormones in pregnant women from Puerto Rico. Environ. Int. 147, 106310.
Rosen, J.F., Chesney, R.W., Hamstra, A., DeLuca, H.F., Mahaffey, K.R., 1980. Reduction in 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D in children with increased lead absorption. The New England journal of medicine 302, 1128–1131.
Ross, A.C., Manson, J.E., Abrams, S.A., Aloia, J.F., Brannon, P.M., Clinton, S.K., Durazo-Arvizu, R.A., Gallagher, J.C., Gallo, R.L., Jones, G., Kovacs, C.S., Mayne, S.T., Rosen, C.J., Shapses, S.A., 2011. The 2011 report on dietary reference intakes for calcium and vitamin D from the Institute of Medicine: what clinicians need to know. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 96, 53–58.
Sánchez, B.N., Hu, H., Litman, H.J., Téllez-Rojo, M.M., 2011. Statistical methods to study timing of vulnerability with sparsely sampled data on environmental toxicants. Environ. Health Perspect. 119, 409–415.
Salle, B.L., Delvin, E.E., Lapillonne, A., Bishop, N.J., Glorieux, F.H., 2000. Perinatal metabolism of vitamin D. Am. J. Clin. Nutrit. 71, 1317s–1324s.
Sauder, K.A., Stamatoiu, A.V., Leshchinskaya, E., Ringham, B.M., Glueck, D.H., Dabelea, D., 2019. Cord Blood Vitamin D Levels and Early Childhood Blood Pressure: The Healthy Start Study. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 8, e011485.
Scragg, R., Camargo Jr., C.A., 2008. Frequency of leisure-time physical activity and serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels in the US population: results from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Am. J. Epidemiol. 168, 577–586 discussion 587-591.
Shen, Y., Pu, L., Si, S., Xin, X., Mo, M., Shao, B., Wu, J., Huang, M., Wang, S., Muyiduli, X., Chen, Z., Jiang, W., Yu, Y., 2020. Vitamin D nutrient status during pregnancy and its influencing factors. Clin. Nutrit. (Edinburgh, Scotland) 39, 1432–1439.
Simonsen, L.O., Harbak, H., Bennekou, P., 2012. Cobalt metabolism and toxicology–a brief update. Sci. Total Environ. 432, 210–215.
Sommar, J.N., Hedmer, M., Lundh, T., Nilsson, L., Skerfving, S., Bergdahl, I.A., 2014. Investigation of lead concentrations in whole blood, plasma and urine as biomarkers for biological monitoring of lead exposure. J. Exposure Sci. Environ. Epidemiol. 24, 51–57.
Sorrell, M., Rosen, J.F., 1977. Interactions of lead, calcium, vitamin D, and nutrition in lead-burdened children. Arch. Environ. Health 32, 160–164.
Tapia, G., Marild, K., Dahl, S.R., Lund-Blix, N.A., Viken, M.K., Lie, B.A., Njolstad, P.R., 2019. Maternal and Newborn Vitamin D-Binding Protein, Vitamin D Levels, Vitamin D Receptor Genotype, and Childhood Type 1. Diabetes 42, 553–559.
Thacher, T.D., Clarke, B.L., 2011. Vitamin D insufficiency. Mayo Clin. Proc. 86, 50–60.
Theodoratou, E., Tzoulaki, I., Zgaga, L., Ioannidis, J.P., 2014. Vitamin D and multiple health outcomes: umbrella review of systematic reviews and meta-analyses of observational studies and randomised trials. BMJ (Clinical research ed) 348, g2035.
Tong, J., Liang, C.M., Huang, K., Xiang, H.Y., Qi, J., Feng, L.L., Lai, Y.P., Shao, S.S., Wu, X.Y., Tao, F.B., 2020. Prenatal serum thallium exposure and 36-month-old children’s attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder symptoms: Ma’anshan birth cohort study. Chemosphere 244, 125499.
Tsiaras, W.G., Weinstock, M.A., 2011. Factors influencing vitamin D status. Acta dermato-venereologica 91, 115–124.
Valeri, L., Mazumdar, M.M., Bobb, J.F., Claus Henn, B., Rodrigues, E., Sharif, O.I.A., Kile, M.L., Quamruzzaman, Q., Afroz, S., Golam, M., Amarasiriwardena, C., Bellinger, D.C., Christiani, D.C., Coull, B.A., Wright, R.O., 2017. The Joint Effect of Prenatal Exposure to Metal Mixtures on Neurodevelopmental Outcomes at 20-40 Months of Age: Evidence from Rural Bangladesh. Environ. Health Perspectives 125, 067015.
Van de Vijver, A., Drakopoulos, P., Van Landuyt, L., Vaiarelli, A., Blockeel, C., Santos-Ribeiro, S., Tournaye, H., Polyzos, N.P., 2016. Vitamin D deficiency and pregnancy rates following frozen-thawed embryo transfer: a prospective cohort study. Hum. Reproduct. (Oxford, England) 31, 1749–1754.
Vriens, A., Nawrot, T.S., Baeyens, W., Den Hond, E., Bruckers, L., Covaci, A., Croes, K., De Craemer, S., Govarts, E., Lambrechts, N., Loots, I., Nelen, V., Peusens, M., De Henauw, S., Schoeters, G., Plusquin, M., 2017. Neonatal exposure to environmental pollutants and placental mitochondrial DNA content: A multi-pollutant approach. Environ. Int. 106, 60–68.
Wang, T.J., Zhang, F., Richards, J.B., Kestenbaum, B., van Meurs, J.B., Berry, D., Kiel, D. P., Streeten, E.A., Ohlsson, C., Koller, D.L., Peltonen, L., Cooper, J.D., O’Reilly, P.F., Houston, D.K., Glazer, N.L., Vandenput, L., Peacock, M., Shi, J., Rivadeneira, F., McCarthy, M.I., Anneli, P., de Boer, I.H., Mangino, M., Kato, B., Smyth, D.J., Booth, S.L., Jacques, P.F., Burke, G.L., Goodarzi, M., Cheung, C.L., Wolf, M., Rice, K., Goltzman, D., Hidiroglou, N., Ladouceur, M., Wareham, N.J., Hocking, L.J., Hart, D., Arden, N.K., Cooper, C., Malik, S., Fraser, W.D., Hartikainen, A.L., Zhai, G., Macdonald, H.M., Forouhi, N.G., Loos, R.J., Reid, D.M., Hakim, A., Dennison, E., Liu, Y., Power, C., Stevens, H.E., Jaana, L., Vasan, R.S., Soranzo, N., Bojunga, J., Psaty, B.M., Lorentzon, M., Foroud, T., Harris, T.B., Hofman, A., Jansson, J.O., Cauley, J.A., Uitterlinden, A.G., Gibson, Q., Järvelin, M.R., Karasik, D., Siscovick, D. S., Econs, M.J., Kritchevsky, S.B., Florez, J.C., Todd, J.A., Dupuis, J., Hyppönen, E., Spector, T.D., 2010. Common genetic determinants of vitamin D insufficiency: a genome-wide association study. Lancet (London, England) 376, 180–188.
Wang, X., Gao, D., Zhang, G., Zhang, X., Li, Q., Gao, Q., Chen, R., Xu, S., Huang, L., Zhang, Y., Lin, L., Zhong, C., Chen, X., Sun, G., Song, Y., Yang, X., Hao, L., Yang, H., Yang, L., Yang, N., 2020. Exposure to multiple metals in early pregnancy and gestational diabetes mellitus: A prospective cohort study. Environ. Int. 135, 105370.
Wang, Y.X., Feng, W., Zeng, Q., Sun, Y., Wang, P., You, L., Yang, P., Huang, Z., Yu, S.L., Lu, W.Q., 2016. Variability of Metal Levels in Spot, First Morning, and 24-Hour Urine Samples over a 3-Month Period in Healthy Adult Chinese Men. Environ. Health Perspect. 124, 468–476.
Weather China. Introduction of Wuhan City (in Chinese). http://www.weather.com.cn/cityintro/101200101.shtml. (Accessed 16 April 2021).
Woods, J.S., Fowler, B.A., 1986. Alteration of hepatocellular structure and function by thallium chloride: ultrastructural, morphometric, and biochemical studies. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 83, 218–229.
Wortsman, J., Matsuoka, L.Y., Chen, T.C., Lu, Z., Holick, M.F., 2000. Decreased bioavailability of vitamin D in obesity. Am. J. Clin. Nutrit. 72, 690–693.
Wu, H., Xu, B., Guan, Y., Chen, T., Huang, R., Zhang, T., Sun, R., Xie, K., Chen, M., 2020. A metabolomic study on the association of exposure to heavy metals in the first trimester with primary tooth eruption. Sci. Total Environ. 723, 138107.
Wu, M., Shu, Y., Song, L., Liu, B., Zhang, L., Wang, L., Liu, Y., Bi, J., Xiong, C., Cao, Z., Xu, S., Xia, W., Li, Y., Wang, Y., 2019. Prenatal exposure to thallium is associated with decreased mitochondrial DNA copy number in newborns: Evidence from a birth cohort study. Environ. Int. 129, 470–477.
Xia, J., Song, Y., 2019. Vitamin D status during pregnancy and the risk of gestational diabetes mellitus: A longitudinal study in a multiracial cohort. Diabetes Obes. Metab. 21, 1895–1905.
Xia, W., Du, X., Zheng, T., Zhang, B., Li, Y., Bassig, B.A., Zhou, A., Wang, Y., Xiong, C., Li, Z., Yao, Y., Hu, J., Zhou, Y., Liu, J., Xue, W., Ma, Y., Pan, X., Peng, Y., Xu, S., 2016. A Case-Control Study of Prenatal Thallium Exposure and Low Birth Weight in China. Environ. Health Perspect. 124, 164–169.
Younes, M., Strubelt, O., 1991. Vanadate-induced toxicity towards isolated perfused rat livers: the role of lipid peroxidation. Toxicology 66, 63–74.
Zamoiski, R.D., Guallar, E., García-Vargas, G.G., Rothenberg, S.J., Resnick, C., Andrade, M.R., Steuerwald, A.J., Parsons, P.J., Weaver, V.M., Navas-Acien, A., Silbergeld, E.K., 2014. Association of arsenic and metals with concentrations of 25-hydroxyvitamin D and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D among adolescents in Torreón Mexico. Environ. Health Perspectives 122, 1233–1238.
Zhang, Q.Q., Li, J.H., Wang, Y.D., Li, X.N., Wang, J.Q., Zhou, M.Y., Dong, M.R., Chen, G. M., Ye, Y.F., Zhang, H.H., Zhu, W., Liu, T., Zhang, B., 2021. Association between maternal thallium exposure and risk of gestational diabetes mellitus: Evidence from a birth cohort study. Chemosphere 270, 128637.
Zhao, H., Tang, J., Zhu, Q., He, H., Li, S., Jin, L., Zhang, X., Zhu, L., Guo, J., Zhang, D., Luo, Q., Chen, G., 2020. Associations of prenatal heavy metals exposure with placental characteristics and birth weight in Hangzhou Birth Cohort: Multi-pollutant models based on elastic net regression. Sci. Total Environ. 742, 140613.
Zhou, Y., Zhu, Q., Ma, W., Xia, B., Xiao, X., Zhao, Y., Wang, P., Shi, H., Zeng, Y., Zhang, Y., 2019. Prenatal vanadium exposure, cytokine expression, and fetal growth: A gender-specific analysis in Shanghai MCPC study. Sci. Total Environ. 685, 1152–1159.
Zhu, B., Liang, C., Yan, S., Li, Z., Huang, K., Xia, X., Hao, J., Zhu, P., Tao, F., 2019. Association between serum thallium in early pregnancy and risk of gestational diabetes mellitus: The Ma’anshan birth cohort study. J. Trace Elements Med. Biol.: Organ Soc. Min. Trace Elements (GMS) 52, 151–156.
Zhu, P., Tong, S.L., Hao, J.H., Tao, R.X., Huang, K., Hu, W.B., Zhou, Q.F., Jiang, X.M., Tao, F.B., 2015. Cord blood vitamin D and neurocognitive development are nonlinearly related in toddlers. J. Nutrit. 145, 1232–1238. 