# Comparison of indoor and outdoor oxidative potential of PM2.5: pollution levels, temporal patterns, and key constituents

## A B S T R A C T

Oxidative potential (OP) of PM2.5 is an emerging health indicator representing its ability to induce oxidative stress and cause adverse health effects. We examined pollution levels, temporal variations, and key constituents of PM2.5 OP by DTT assay in both indoor and outdoor environments in Nanjing, China, for over one year. Outdoor OPM (mass-normalized OP characterizes toxicity) and OPV (volume-based OP characterizes overall oxidative burden) in Nanjing were at a medium level compared to results reported for twenty-seven cities. Although PM2.5 mass concentration consistently decreased during outdoor-to-indoor transport, OPM varied by a factor of up to 2 in either direction, indicating a change of PM2.5’s ability to disrupt oxidative-reductive balance. Temporally, both outdoor and indoor OPM exhibited a significant seasonality pattern (P < 0.01) as autumn > summer > spring > winter. Outdoor and indoor daytime-nighttime OPV and OPM are fluctuating within two-fold range. In addition, the change in water-soluble Fe had the highest correlation coefficient (P < 0.05) with ΔOPM (ΔOPM = OPM, in-OPM, out) among constituents measured here. Our results suggest that development of mitigation strategies take indoor PM2.5’s OP into account, instead of outdoors only, since they differ.

## 1. Introduction

Several studies have examined OP of outdoor PM2.5. For example, measurement of PM2.5 OP has been reported in Lecce, southern Italy; Atlanta, Birmingham, and Centerville in southeastern US; Beijing, Shanghai, and Bohai Bay of China; Patiala in India and Gwangju in Korea. PM2.5 has led to 1.42 million deaths in 2019 in China. Although PM2.5-related health mechanisms are not entirely clear, growing evidence shows that PM2.5 toxicity is, at least partially, determined by oxidative stress. Oxidative stress is caused by excessive accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS, e.g., H2O2, OH⋅, O⋅) in the body.

Oxidative potential (OP), defined as the ability of particles to induce oxidative stress, is an emerging metric that can better characterize health effects of particles, which are associated with both particle dose (mass concentration) and toxicity (intrinsic property). Volume-standardized oxidative potential OPV (nmol/min/m3) characterizes the overall oxidative burden of particles. Mass-standardized oxidative potential OPM (pmol/min/μg) characterizes the toxicity, which is closely related to the PM2.5 composition. Currently, a few studies have compared indoor and outdoor environments on OPV and/or OPM in Shanghai, Beijing, Xi’an, Maryland in the US. Fig. 1. Locations and photo information of sampling sites: (a) Office-A; (b) Office-B; (c) Conference-C; (d) Dormitory-D; (e) Dormitory-E; (f) Dormitory-F

The specific objectives of this work are:
1) to compare indoor and outdoor OP,
2) to study temporal patterns of indoor and outdoor OP, and
3) to identify key constituents that affect OP during outdoor-to-indoor transport. This present study can provide useful information to health risk assessment and mitigation strategies development for indoor and outdoor PM2.5 pollution.

## 2. Materials and methods

### 2.1. Sample collection
### 2.2. PM2.5 extraction and chemical analysis

The quartz filters were evenly cut into two portions for various chemical compositions analysis. One-half of each quartz filter was used for acid-soluble iron detection and the other half for water-soluble iron, Na+, SO42-, NH4+, NO3-, Cl-, Ca2+, K+, and Mg2+. During the extraction, the filter was cut and extracted with a 20 ml extract solution (acid-soluble fraction with 5% HNO3, water-soluble fraction with deionized water) via ultrasonication using an ultrasonic cleaner for 30 mins. The extracts of the PM2.5 were filtered using a 0.45 μm filter and diluted to 50 ml with DI water. Finally, acid-soluble and water-soluble iron were detected by Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometer (ICP-OES) (Optima 8000, PerkinElmer), and Na+, SO42-, NH4+, NO3-, Cl-, Ca2+, K+, Mg2+ were analyzed using Ion Chromatograph (ICS-2100, Dionex).

PM2.5 was sampled simultaneously indoors and outdoors in Nanjing (31.14°N, 118.22°E), the capital city of Jiangsu Province in East China, during four observational periods in different seasons: spring (March-May), summer (June-August), autumn (September-November), and winter (December-February). PM2.5 was sampled for daytime-nighttime variation from September to December in 2019 and August to September in 2020. The sampling sites for this field campaign were located in the Sipailou Campus of Southeast University, as shown in Fig. 1. The outdoor site was on a platform about 3 m above ground adjacent to an office building. The co-occurring collection of indoor samples were made in offices and student dormitories with no indoor pollution source and occupant activities. During the sampling period, PM2.5 was collected over 8–12 h on quartz fiber filters (Diameter 90 mm, Whatman QMA) using a medium flow sampler (KB-120F, Jinshida, Qingdao) with a flow rate of 100 L/min. All filters were pre- and post-conditioned in a dedicated incubator under specified conditions (temperature: 25 ± 1℃; relative humidity: 50 ± 5%) for at least 24 h. The PM2.5 mass concentrations were determined using a high-precision digital balance with a precision of 1 × 10^-5 g (METTLER TOLEDO, Switzerland) before and after sampling. Each filter was weighed at least three times, and the acceptable deviations were within 0.00010 g. The blank filter was incubated and treated similarly to serve as a comparison for the subsequent analyses.

### 2.3. Oxidative potential analysis

Oxidative potential of PM2.5 was detected by DTT assay, which estimates the redox activity of PM2.5 by detecting the ability of the particulate redox active compounds to catalyze the transfer of electrons from DTT to oxygen. Hence, the DTT consumption rate is proportional to the concentration of redox active compounds in the PM2.5 extracts. In this study, the experimental procedure is mainly based on Fang et al. The DTT involved in the reaction is oxidized to its disulfide. The residual DTT is allowed to react with 5,5'-dithiobis-2-nitrobenzoic acid (DTNB) and generate a light-absorbing product, 2-nitro-5-thiobenzoic acid (TNB), whose absorbance is quantified using a UV–Visible Spectrophotometer (V-1800, AOE Instruments) at 412 nm. DTT consumption rate was calculated using the absorbance value at time points of 4, 10, 15, 20, 30 min. During the experiment, all lights were turned off to exclude the impact of light and all reaction vials were covered with aluminum foil. Volume-normalized oxidative potential (OPV) was the rate of DTT consumed per minute per volume of air (nmol/min/m3). Mass-normalized oxidative potential (OPM) was calculated by dividing OPV for each sample by total PM2.5 mass concentration resulting in the units of “pmol/min/μg”. ## Results and discussion

### Outdoor PM2.5 oxidative potential levels

From December 2018 to September 2020, a total of 171 indoor-outdoor pairs of samples were collected in Nanjing. The average outdoor PM2.5 mass concentration was 41.7 ± 25.1 μg/m3. Average outdoor PM2.5 OPM is 55 ± 24 pmol/min/μg (range: 13 to 156 pmol/min/μg), and the average outdoor OPV was 2.1 ± 1.1 nmol/min/m3 (range: 0.2 to 6.5 nmol/min/m3). The outdoor OPM and OPV of Nanjing are at a medium level compared to results for twenty-seven locations reported in the literature. The average indoor PM2.5 mass concentration was 28.1 ± 17.6 μg/m3. Average indoor OPM is 55 ± 35 pmol/min/μg (range: 7 to 195 pmol/min/μg), and average OPV is 1.4 ± 1.0 nmol/min/m3 (range: 0.2 to 5.5 nmol/min/m3).

### Relationship between OP in indoor and outdoor samples

We compared PM2.5 mass concentration and OPM between indoors and outdoors, as illustrated in Fig. 3. It can be seen that PM2.5 mass concentration decreased during outdoor-to-indoor transport, which reflects mass loss by infiltration and deposition. Fig. 3. Comparison of (a) PM2.5 mass concentration, and (b) OPM (log10-coordinates) between indoor and outdoor environments for Nanjing samples.

Fig. 4. Seasonal variations of volume-normalized OP (nmol/min/m3) (a), and mass-normalized OP (pmol/min/μg) (b) in indoor and outdoor samples collected in Nanjing.

In contrast, we observed fluctuating differences between indoor OPM and outdoor OPM, as shown in Fig. 3b. OPM of PM2.5 can change by a factor of up to 2 during outdoor-to-indoor transport. It indicated that outdoor OPM does not represent indoor OPM. Ability of PM2.5 to disturb oxidative-reductive balance could increase or decrease during the outdoor-to-indoor process. Comparison of PM2.5 mass concentrations and OPM in each season between indoors and outdoors are displayed in the Supporting Information (Fig. S1). 40% of the data obtained in summer shows higher indoor OPM than outdoors. This number increases to 67% in winter, indicating a higher fraction of higher indoor OPM than outdoors. This number is 47% and 55% for spring and autumn, respectively. This difference may be directly attributed to the difference in PM2.5 compositions fraction between indoor and outdoor environments. Environmental conditions, such as temperature and relative humidity, may indirectly affect OPM. For example, temperature and relative humidity of indoor and outdoor environments are similar in spring and autumn. In contrast, environmental conditions are more different between indoors and outdoors in summer and winter due to use of air conditioning.

Other researchers have examined the relationship between indoor and outdoor OPM. Khurshid et al. reported that indoor OPM was 3.5 ± 0.63 times higher than outdoors via EPR assay and found that OPM was influenced by several environmental factors, such as ventilation rate, temperature, and relative humidity. Brehmer et al. found that OPM in the living room was almost twice as much as the outdoor level by measuring ROS with the fluorescent probe (DCFH-DA) method. All these together indicate that even when PM2.5 mass concentration decreases during outdoor-to-indoor transport, health risks arising from indoor exposure would not necessarily decrease and may even increase. Oxidative potential should be considered to assess the health effects of PM2.5. Reducing the PM2.5 mass concentrations alone may not sufficiently reduce the oxidative potential risk. Considering that people spend more than 80% of their time indoors, mitigation strategies should aim at oxidative potential of indoor PM2.5.

### Seasonal and daytime-nighttime variation of oxidative potential

The seasonal variation of PM2.5 mass concentration is showed in Fig. S2, ranging from 10.6 to 160.2 μg/m3 outdoors and from 4.6 to 106.7 μg/m3 indoors. There was no obvious seasonal difference of OPV either outdoors or indoors, as shown in Fig. 4(a). In contrast, outdoor OPM exhibited a significant seasonal variation (P < 0.01) and was ranked as autumn (average: 63, median: 57, range: 21–149) > summer (average: 60, median: 56, range: 20–156) > spring (average: 47, median: 43, range: 16–83) > winter (average: 35, median: 36, range: 13–67), as illustrated in Fig. 4(b). Daily outdoor OPM also is displayed in the Supporting Information (Fig. S3). The seasonal variation of indoor OPM is similar to outdoors, and also ranked as autumn (average: 66, Fig. 5. Daytime-nighttime variations of OP in outdoor (a, 1–2) and indoor (b, 1–2) environments for Nanjing samples.

median: 65, range: 20–182) > summer (average: 57, median: 49, range: 12–195) > spring (average: 51, median: 42, range: 7–164) > winter (average: 36, median: 35, range: 12–99). The seasonal pattern of outdoor PM2.5 OPM may be different in different regions. For instance, Wang et al. reported a strong seasonality (P < 0.01) for outdoor OPM in Hangzhou and found that the OPM was highest in autumn, and lowest in summer. Zhang et al. compared two seasonal outdoor PM2.5 samples (summer and winter) and found that the ROS production in Nanjing was highest in summer. In the work of Chen et al., it was reported that the seasonal OPM in Xi’an was ranked as summer (140 pmol/min/μg) > spring (130 pmol/min/μg) > winter (110 pmol/min/μg) ≈ autumn (110 pmol/min/μg).

Table 1
Pearson correlation coefficients (r) between the change of OPM and components mass fraction, temperature, and humidity (total samples size is 92).

| Component       | ΔOPM  |
|------------------|-------|
| ΔNa+             | 0.14  |
| ΔCl2+            | 0.03  |
| ΔCa              | 0.06  |
| ΔK+2+            | 0.23* |
| ΔMg2             | 0.04  |
| ΔSO4+            | 0.30* |
| ΔNH43            | 0.05  |
| ΔNO              | 0.06  |
| ΔFe (WS)        | 0.33* |
| ΔFe (AS)        | 0.07  |
| ΔT (℃)          | 0.05  |
| ΔRH (%)          | 0.11  |

* P < 0.05.

It is anticipated that variation of OPM is mainly driven by composition of PM2.5. It has been recognized that high temperature, typical environmental conditions, and strong photochemical reactions can promote the formation of secondary organic aerosols efficiently, especially quinones, which can react with oxygen and form free radicals. Furthermore, a previous study found that the proportion of metallic elements in outdoor PM2.5 in Nanjing was relatively higher in summer (0.97%) and autumn (0.78%) than that in winter (0.51%) and spring (0.18%). This may contribute to the higher OPM values in summer and autumn. Another study reported that sulfate salts and their hygroscopicity made a larger contribution to ROS-related water-soluble Fe in summer by their associated liquid water, which is required to drive water-soluble Fe dissolution.

Daytime-nighttime variations of outdoor and indoor OP were examined from September to December 2019 and August to September 2020. Thirty samples were collected outdoors, and thirty-four samples were collected indoors, as shown in Fig. 5a and 5b, respectively. There are slight differences in both average outdoor and indoor OPV and OPM between daytime and nighttime (day vs. night outdoor OPV: 1.7 ± 0.7 nmol/min/m3 vs. 1.9 ± 1.3 nmol/min/m; day vs. night indoor OPV: 1.03 ± 0.7 nmol/min/m3 vs. 1.1 ± 0.8 nmol/min/m3; day vs. night outdoor OPM: 58 ± 23 pmol/min/μg vs. 54 ± 18 pmol/min/μg; day vs. night indoor OPM: 52 ± 24 pmol/min/μg vs. 68 ± 37 pmol/min/μg). However, both outdoor and indoor daytime-nighttime OPV and OPM fluctuated within the two-fold range. Only indoor OPM exhibited statistically significant daytime-nighttime variation (P < 0.05). We also calculated the absolute value of daytime-nighttime relative change of OPM. Fig. 6. Relationships between PM2.5 mass concentration and OP in indoor and outdoor environments for Nanjing samples. (a) indoor OPM; (b) outdoor OPM; (c) indoor OPV; (d) outdoor OPV

(ΦOPM=|OPM, night/OPM, day-1|). Results showed that the average outdoor ΦOPM is 26% (range: 1–111%, median: 17%) and the average indoor ΦOPM is 61% (range: 1–421%, median: 34%), indicating a larger difference between day and night for indoor OPM than outdoor OPM

3.4. Relationship between PM2.5 constituents and oxidative potential

To investigate specific chemical constituents in PM2.5 responsible for change of OPM during outdoor-to-indoor transport, Pearson correlation coefficients (r) were calculated to relate the difference of OPM (ΔOPM = OPM, in-OPM, out) during outdoor-to-indoor to the change of chemical species mass fraction of PM2.5, i.e., ΔC/Cmp=(C/Cmpin-(C/Cmpout,ii ) where Ci is the concentration of chemical species i in PM2.5; Cmp is the PM2.5 mass concentration. Such a correlation analysis can help identify species responsible for OPM change during outdoor-to-indoor transport and potential for building control. Small sample size (n < 30) of individual outdoor and indoor species samples makes a separate correlation analysis difficult. The values of r are given in Table 1. It was found that the ΔOPM had a positive correlation with the change in water-soluble iron (P < 0.05), suggesting that WS-Fe is a key determinant of OPM, as reported by previous studies. In contrast, the change in acid-soluble Fe showed a much weaker correlation with ΔOPM than the change in WS-Fe. This is consisted with the fact that water-soluble iron is more biologically accessible than its acid-soluble form. It indicates that water-soluble iron is more liable to produce ROS in the human body through absorption and blood circulation. Several studies have identified Fe as a potential ROS-active species via Fenton reaction. It is essential to control the main sources of Fe, such as dust and traffic pollution. ΔOPM also had a significant Pearson correlation (P < 0.01) with ΔSO42. We also found that ΔSO42 had a significant positive correlation with the change in water-soluble Fe (r = 0.6, P < 0.01). Sulfate is known as a major factor for modulating particle pH, which impacts dissolution of iron in aqueous solution, and may further affect oxidative potential of PM2.5. Moreover, ΔOPM exhibited a significant positive correlation ΔK+ (P < 0.05). A previous study found a significant correlation between OPM and K+ that was likely produced by local biomass burning.

3.5. Relationship between PM2.5 mass concentration and OP

Furthermore, we observed a negative relationship between PM2.5 mass concentration and OPM, as illustrated in Fig. 6(a) and (b). OPM generally decreases as PM2.5 mass concentration increases both indoors and outdoors, indicating that when PM2.5 mass concentration is low, its OPM is relatively high. This leads to smaller increase of OPV at high mass concentration than that at low mass concentration, as shown in Fig. 6(c) and (d). A previous epidemiological study showed that the concentration–response curve between daily mean PM2.5 mass concentration and daily mortality shows a similar trend as Fig. 6(d). The curve gets flattened as the daily mean PM2.5 mass concentration gets increases, that is slope of the curve decreases. The slope actually represents intrinsic toxicity property of PM2.5. The decreasing trend of the slope is similar to that of OPM along with particle mass concentration, as shown in Fig. 6(b). This implies that characteristics of OPM may partially explain the results. It is noticed that PM2.5 OPV increases with mass concentration both indoors and outdoors, as shown in Fig. 6(c) and (d). A mathematical fitting in power function form gave correlation coefficients of 0.46 and 0.59 for indoors and outdoors, respectively. 3.6. Spatial distribution of PM2.5

Considering the outdoor spatial variation in Nanjing, we preliminarily measured OP in different outdoor environments from October to December 2020. Outdoor PM2.5 was sampled simultaneously at the roadside, lakeside, and park, 500 m, 1 km, and 3 km away from the campus, respectively. The difference in OPM and OPV between roadside, lakeside, park and campus are generally less than 20%, as shown in Fig. S4. This indicate that outdoor OPM was similar between these sites. In addition, we also examined the differences in OPM and OPV between different indoor environments. We sampled more than one indoor environment in each of the 43 days. We calculated relative standard deviation of indoor OPM (IN-RSD, OPM) and OPV (IN-RSD, OPV) in each day as a ratio of standard deviation to average. The values of IN-RSD, OPM and IN-RSD, OPV are greater than 20% in half of the total 43 days, as shown in Fig. S5 (a) and (b). This indicates a heterogeneous feature of OPM and OPV in various indoor environments.

4. Conclusions

In summary, this study reveals that OPM of indoor PM2.5 is not equal to outdoors. It might increase or decrease by a factor of up to 2 during outdoor-to-indoor transport. As people spend most of their time indoors, mitigation strategies aimed at reducing health risk from oxidative stress should take OPM of indoor PM2.5 into account, instead of outdoor PM2.5 only, if OP of PM2.5 is a better metric than mass concentration to characterize health risk. To do that, more studies should be done in two aspects. First, source apportionment is necessary. We found that instead of major PM2.5 species, water-soluble Fe is responsible for change of OPM during outdoor-to-indoor transport. This indicates that source apportionment profile of PM2.5 mass would not explain that of PM2.5 oxidative potential. New efforts should be made to elucidate contributions of various sources to PM2.5 oxidative potential for better source control. Second, intervention is also needed in a building level. Research should be conducted to develop measures to reduce OPM of PM2.5 during outdoor-to-indoor transport. Combining with air cleaning technologies, we can mitigate both mass concentration and oxidative toxicity in buildings. F. Yang et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106684

| Author(s) | Title | Journal | Volume | Pages | Year |
|-----------|-------|---------|--------|-------|------|
| Prahalad, A.K., Inmon, J., Dailey, L.A., Madden, M.C., Ghio, A.J., Gallagher, J.E. | Air Pollution Particles Mediated Oxidative DNA Base Damage in a Cell Free System and in Human Airway Epithelial Cells in Relation to Particulate Metal Content and Bioreactivity | Chem. Res. Toxicol. | 14 | 879–887 | 2001 |
| Gurgueira, S.A., Lawrence, J., Coull, B., Murthy, G.G., Gonzalez-Flecha, B. | Rapid increases in the steady-state concentration of reactive oxygen species in the lungs and heart after particulate air pollution inhalation | Environ Health Perspect. | 110 | 749–755 | 2002 |
| Janssen, N.A.H., Yang, A., Strak, M., Steenhof, M., Hellack, B., Gerlofs-Nijland, M.E., Kuhlbusch, T., Kelly, F., Harrison, R., Brunekreef, B., Hoek, G., Cassee, F. | Oxidative potential of particulate matter collected at sites with different source characteristics | Sci. Total Environ. | 472 | 572–581 | 2014 |
| Khurshid, S.S., Emmerich, S., Persily, A. | Oxidative potential of particles at a research house: Influencing factors and comparison with outdoor particles | Build. Environ. | 163 | 106275 | 2019 |
| Lakey, P.S.J., Berkemeier, T., Tong, H., Arangio, A.M., Lucas, K., Pöschl, U., Shiraiwa, M. | Chemical exposure-response relationship between air pollutants and reactive oxygen species in the human respiratory tract | Sci. Rep.-UK | 6 | 1 | 2016 |
| Lee, M., Eum, K., Fang, S.C., Rodrigues, E.G., Modest, G.A., Christiani, D.C. | Oxidative stress and systemic inflammation as modifiers of cardiac autonomic responses to particulate air pollution | Int. J. Cardiol. | 176 | 166–170 | 2014 |
| Li, N., Sioutas, C., Cho, A., Schmitz, D., Misra, C., Sempf, J., Wang, M., Oberley, T., Froines, J., Nel, A. | Ultrafine particulate pollutants induce oxidative stress and mitochondrial damage | Environ Health Perspect. | 111 | 455–460 | 2003 |
| Li, R., Han, Y., Wang, L., Shang, Y., Chen, Y. | Differences in oxidative potential of black carbon from three combustion emission sources in China | J. Environ. Manage. | 240 | 57–65 | 2019 |
| Lippmann, M. | Toxicological and epidemiological studies of cardiovascular effects of ambient air fine particulate matter (PM2.5) and its chemical components: Coherence and public health implications | Crit. Rev. Toxicol. | 44 | 299–347 | 2014 |
| Liu, C., Chen, R., Sera, F., Vicedo-Cabrera, A.M., Guo, Y., Tong, S., Coelho, M.S.Z.S., Saldiva, P.H.N., Lavigne, E., Matus, P., Ortega, N.V., Garcia, S.O., Pascal, M., Stafoggia, M., Scortichini, M., Hashizume, M., Honda, Y., Hurtado-Diaz, M., Cruz, J., Nunes, B., Teixeira, J.P., Kim, H., Tobias, A., Iniguez, C., Forsberg, B., Astrom, C., Ragettli, M.S., Guo, Y., Chen, B., Bell, M.L., Wright, C.Y., Scovronick, N., Garland, R.M., Milojevic, A., Kysely, J., Urban, A., Orru, H., Indermitte, E., Jaakkola, J.J.K., Ryti, N.R.I., Katsouyanni, K., Analitis, A., Zanobetti, A., Schwartz, J., Chen, J., Wu, T., Cohen, A., Gasparrini, A., Kan, H. | Ambient Particulate Air Pollution and Daily Mortality in 652 Cities | New Engl. J. Med. | 381 | 705–715 | 2019 |
| Liu, C., Wang, H., Guo, H. | Redistribution of PM2.5-associated nitrate and ammonium during outdoor-to-indoor transport | Indoor Air | 29 | 460–468 | 2019 |
| Liu, C., Zhang, Y. | Relations between indoor and outdoor PM2.5 and constituent concentrations | Front. Env. Sci. Eng. | 13 | 1 | 2019 |
| Liu, W., Xu, Y., Liu, W., Liu, Q., Yu, S., Liu, Y., Wang, X., Tao, S. | Oxidative potential of ambient PM2.5 in the coastal cities of the Bohai Sea, northern China: Seasonal variation and source apportionment | Environ. Pollut. | 236 | 514–528 | 2018 |
| Lyu, Y., Guo, H., Cheng, T., Li, X. | Particle Size Distributions of Oxidative Potential of Lung-Deposited Particles: Assessing Contributions from Quinones and Water-Soluble Metals | Environ. Sci. Technol. | 52 | 6592–6600 | 2018 |
| Mugica, V., Ortiz, E., Molina, L., De Vizcaya-Ruiz, A., Nebot, A., Quintana, R., Aguilar, J., Alcántara, E. | PM composition and source reconciliation in Mexico City | Atmos. Environ. | 43 | 5068–5074 | 2009 |
| Nishita Hara, C., Hirabayashi, M., Hara, K., Yamazaki, A., Hayashi, M. | Dithiothreitol-Measured Oxidative Potential of Size-Segregated Particulate Matter in Fukuoka, Japan: Effects of Asian Dust Events | GeoHealth | 3 | 160–173 | 2019 |
| Niu, X., Ho, K.F., Hu, T., Sun, J., Duan, J., Huang, Y., Lui, K.H., Cao, J. | Characterization of chemical components and cytotoxicity effects of indoor and outdoor fine particulate matter (PM2.5) in Xi’an, China | Environ. Sci. Pollut. R. | 26 | 31913–31923 | 2019 |
| Paraskevopoulou, D., Bougiatioti, A., Stavroulas, I., Fang, T., Lianou, M., Liakakou, E., Gerasopoulos, E., Weber, R., Nenes, A., Mihalopoulos, N. | Yearlong variability of oxidative potential of particulate matter in an urban Mediterranean environment | Atmos. Environ. | 206 | 183–196 | 2019 |
| Patel, A., Rastogi, N. | Oxidative potential of ambient fine aerosol over a semi-urban site in the Indo-Gangetic Plain | Atmos. Environ. | 175 | 127–134 | 2018 |
| Perrone, M.R., Bertoli, I., Romano, S., Russo, M., Rispoli, G., Pietrogrande, M.C. | PM2.5 and PM10 oxidative potential at a Central Mediterranean Site: Contrasts between dithiothreitol- and ascorbic acid-measured values in relation with particle size and chemical composition | Atmos. Environ. | 210 | 143–155 | 2019 |
| Pope, C.A., Burnett, R.T., Thurston, G.D., Thun, M.J., Calle, E.E., Krewski, D., Godleski, J.J. | Cardiovascular Mortality and Long-Term Exposure to Particulate Air Pollution | Circulation | 109 | 71–77 | 2004 | F. Yang et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106684

seasonal variation. Sci. Total Environ. 650277–650287.
Zhan, Y., Johnson, K., Norris, C., Shafer, M.M., Bergin, M.H., Zhang, Y., Zhang, J., Schauer, J.J., 2018. The influence of air cleaners on indoor particulate matter components and oxidative potential in residential households in Beijing. Sci. Total Environ. 626507–626518.
Zhang, K., Nie, D., Chen, M., Wu, Y., Ge, X., Hu, J., Ge, P., Li, W., Huang, B., Yuan, Y., Li, Z., Ma, X., 2019. Chemical Characterization of Two Seasonal PM2.5 Samples in Nanjing and Its Toxicological Properties in Three Human Cell Lines. Environments. 6 (4), 42. 