# Early childhood exposure to ambient air pollution is associated with increased risk of paediatric asthma: An administrative cohort study from Stockholm, Sweden

## A R T I C L E I N F O

**Keywords:**
Air pollution
Asthma
Pediatric asthma
Socio-economy
Environmental medicine

## Introduction

Asthma is a complex, heterogeneous disease and one of the most common chronic diseases among children. Exposure to ambient air pollution in early life and childhood may influence asthma aetiology, but it is uncertain which specific components of air pollution and exposure windows are of importance. The role of socio-economic status (SES) is also unclear. The aims of the present study are, therefore, to investigate how various exposure windows of different pollutants affect risk-induced asthma in early life and to explore the possible effect SES has on that relationship.

## Methods

The study population was constructed using register data on all singleton births in the greater Stockholm area between 2006 and 2013. Exposure to ambient black carbon (BC), fine particulate matter (PM2.5), primary organic carbon (pOC), secondary organic aerosols (SOA), secondary inorganic aerosols, and oxidative potential at the residential address was modelled as mean values for the entire pregnancy period, the first year of life and the first three years of life. Swedish national registers were used to define the outcome: asthma diagnosis assessed at hospital during the first six years of life. Hazard ratios (HRs) and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were modelled with Cox proportional hazards model with age as the underlying time-scale, adjusting for relevant potential confounding variables.

## Results

An increased risk for developing childhood asthma was observed in association with exposure to PM2.5, pOC and SOA during the first three years of life. With an interquartile range increase in exposure, the HRs were 1.06 (95% CI: 1.01–1.10), 1.05 (95% CI: 1.02–1.09) and 1.02 (95% CI: 1.00–1.04), for PM2.5, pOC and SOA, respectively, in the fully adjusted models. Exposure during foetal life or the first year of life was not associated with asthma risk, and the other pollutants were not statistically significantly associated with increased risk. Furthermore, the increase in risk associated with PM2.5 and the components BC, pOC and SOA were stronger in areas with lower SES.

## Conclusion

Our results suggest that exposure to air pollution during the first three years of life may increase the risk for asthma in early childhood. The findings further imply a possible increased vulnerability to air pollution-attributed asthma among low SES children. ## Material and methods

### Study population

The administrative cohort was constructed using register data on all singleton births in the greater Stockholm area occurring between 2006 and 2013 (n = 201,627), which was derived from the Swedish Medical Birth Register (MBR) at The National Board for Health and Welfare. This data was then linked with the children’s in- and outpatient hospital data related to respiratory disease from the Swedish Patient Register, relevant socio-economic data from Statistics Sweden (StS), and the mothers’ home addresses and corresponding geocodes from the Swedish Population Register.

### Health outcome

Given that children born between 2006 and 2013 were included in the study and follow-up ended in 2016, follow-up time ranged between 3–6 years (with the majority being followed up to 6 years of age). Based on national criteria for asthma diagnosis, the validity of this definition is high: 99% for children aged 5–6 years. The diagnosis was also correct for 78% of younger children (aged 0–4.5 years), and almost everyone at the age where it was not correct should have been diagnosed with obstructive bronchitis instead. Asthma was defined as a hospital diagnosis (ICD-10: J45-J46) of asthma with the date of diagnosis serving as the date of asthma onset. Asthma incidence was studied among children up to 6 years of age.

### Exposure assessment

Air pollution exposure has been assessed based on a multiscale air pollution modelling system. Both long-range transported air pollutants and the contribution from local sources were included at different spatial resolutions. The system was based on a coupling of two models, the Danish Eulerian Hemispheric Model (DEHM) and the Urban Background Model (UBM). The DEHM/UBM has been applied in several studies on health effects related to air pollution, e.g., for mortality and recently in a Danish nation-wide, case-control study on childhood asthma. This combined modelling system has also been extensively evaluated for Denmark in connection with the Danish Air Quality Monitoring Programme as well as by international studies. DEHM is a 3-D chemistry-transport model including comprehensive descriptions of 80 chemical components. The model covers the Northern hemisphere with a 150 km × 150 km resolution and includes subdomains over Europe (50 km × 50 km resolution) and Scandinavia (16.67 km × 16.67 km resolution). It also describes the overall processes related to chemical transformation, atmospheric transport and removal of air pollution based on anthropogenic emissions and meteorological parameters. Natural emissions of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) from the biosphere, sea salt from marine surfaces, and nitrogen oxides (NOx) from lightning and soil are included as well. The model’s output consists of hourly concentrations of gases, such as NO2, carbon monoxide (CO), sulphur dioxide (SO2) and ozone (O3) that are directly emitted from combustion processes (primary) or are chemically formed within the atmosphere (secondary). In terms of atmospheric particles, the output includes PM2.5 and PM10. The total mass of these particles includes both directly emitted particles, mineral dust, BC and primary organic carbon (pOC) related to power plant, traffic and wood stove emissions, among others, and secondary particles chemically formed within the atmosphere. These consist of secondary inorganic aerosols (SIA), which are the sum of sulphate, nitrate, both related to combustion processes, and ammonium, related to agriculture. Also included are secondary organic aerosols (SOA) formed from organic precursors emitted mainly from the biosphere. The DEHM model is continuously evaluated against measurements and other models. Moreover, it is currently part of the Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service (CAMS) and is evaluated against European observations online.

To be able to include the contribution from local sources in higher detail, the UBM, a Gaussian plume-in-grid model suitable for estimating the transport and dispersion of the main air pollutants influenced by local-scale emissions, was also utilized. In this study, UBM was setup for a very large domain covering the Nordic countries with a high spatial resolution of 1 km × 1 km. Local emissions were based on the new NordicWelfAir emission inventory with the same resolution, while hourly regional background concentrations and meteorology were obtained from the DEHM model driven by The Weather Research and Forecasting model. UBM includes simple photochemistry for O3, NO2 and nitrogen oxide (NO) as well as the main components relevant for human health exposure studies. Primary emitted particles (BC, pOC and mineral dust) and the relevant gases (CO, SO2, NO, NO2 and O3) were handled in UBM. D. Olsson et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106667

resolution of 1 km × 1 km), while the secondary formed particles were adjusted for Ox, and the models for Ox were adjusted for BC. managed in DEHM (with a resolution of 16.67 km × 16.67 km). A full evaluation of the DEHM/UBM model setup for the Nordic area is in progress within the NordicWelfAir project. For this study, the DEHM/UBM model system has been evaluated against observations (obs) from the Stockholm area. The model captures the expected O3 gradient between the rural background site Norr Malma and the urban site Torkel Knutsson, with modelled concentrations being higher at the rural site (obs: 50.9 μg/m3, model: 50.8 μg/m3) compared to the urban site (obs: 54.1 μg/m3, model: 65.7 μg/m3, annual mean 2015). Finally, the presence of effect modification by neighbourhood socio-economic factors was explored. In separate models, interaction terms were added between the air pollutants and both neighbourhood distribution of highest degree and neighbourhood annual household income to Model 4, described above. To evaluate the shape of the concentration-response function, a natural cubic spline with 4 degrees of freedom was used, adjusting as described in Model 4. If the estimated concentration-response function appeared linear between the 5th and 95th percentile of air pollution distribution, a linear coefficient was used to estimate the association. All results are presented per interquartile range (IQR) increase, and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) are used to assess statistical significance. R 3.6.2 was utilized for all statistical analyses, while the Cox proportional hazards models were created using the “survival” package.

Three exposure windows were studied: entire pregnancy, first year of life and the first three years of life. Information on the mother’s home address was collected 1 year before birth and used for the prenatal exposure value. The mother’s address at the time of birth was gathered and used to represent exposure for the first year of life. Finally, the home address registered at the child’s first, second and third birthday was used for assessing exposure for the child’s first three years of life. The exposure levels during pregnancy were modelled as mean values for the entire pregnancy based on the delivery date and estimated duration of gestation. For the first year of life and first three years of life, exposure levels were calculated as the mean exposure from the date of birth to the first and third birthday, respectively. As a quality measure, the top 0.5 percentile of modelled concentrations were excluded from the analyses.

2.4. Covariates
Based on previous observations, data on potentially important determinants and risk factors, or risk markers, was collected from health registers. This information included individual-level data on maternal asthma (from MBR), maternal age when the child was born (from MBR), maternal country of birth in twelve categories (from MBR/StS), maternal smoking during pregnancy (from MBR), maternal level of education (from StS), household disposable income the year before birth (from StS). Group-level variables were also gathered and included neighbourhood distribution of highest degree (from StS) and neighbourhood distribution of annual disposable income (from StS).

The Swedish Medical Birth Register covers nearly all pregnancies in Sweden according to The National Board of Health and Welfare, the public agency responsible for the MBR. Still, the completeness of data for this study varies slightly. Data on delivery and delivery-related issues, for example, were virtually complete, while data collected during antenatal care visits (i.e., maternal smoking status) were missing for many pregnancies. The initially defined register-based cohort for this study included 201,627 children; however, all those exposed to the top 0.5 percentile of the studied air pollutants were excluded, which yielded 188,565 children in the entire pregnancy analysis, 187,691 for the first year of life, and 184,253 for the first three years of life. Missing information on covariates for Models 3 and 4 reduced the number of children included to 167,384, 166,305, and 163,740 for the pregnancy, first year of life, and first three years of life analyses, respectively. The main reasons for exclusion were missing information on maternal smoking (5.1%) as well as household disposable income and maternal level of education (3.5% each). Of the children included in the study, 51% were boys and 49% were girls. The median follow-up time was 703 days for asthma cases and 2,191 days for non-cases (Table S1).

2.5. Statistical analysis
The Cox proportional hazards model was used to estimate potential associations between air pollution and asthma. For all exposure windows and pollutants, the association between exposure to air pollution and paediatric asthma was investigated in four models with increasing levels of adjustment: 1) The pollutant of interest, the child’s birth year, the child’s birth month and sex of the child were included. 2) Individual-level data on maternal smoking, level of education, asthma, birth country, age, parity and household disposable income were additionally adjusted for. 3) The group-level variables (neighbourhood distribution of highest educational degree, neighbourhood distribution of annual household income and municipality) were added. 4) Two-pollutant models were fitted, where all particle models from Model 3 were included.

Overall, asthma incidence in this study population up to age 6 was 11%, and the mean number of days from birth to diagnosis was 835. Having a mother with asthma, a mother smoking during pregnancy, or a mother with lower educational attainment were circumstances associated with an especially high asthma incidence: 19%, 18% and 14%, respectively. For children with a smoking mother, the mean number of days to diagnosis was 764. In the fully adjusted models with air pollutants and all covariates included, these risk factors remained important, showing statistically significant associations. For example, the HRs were 1.94 for maternal asthma and 1.42 for smoking (>10 cig/). Table 1
Mean and standard deviation (SD) of air pollutant concentrations (μg/m3) during first three years of life, cumulative asthma incidence (%) and mean number of days from birth to asthma diagnosis for different covariate categories, for children with and without diagnosis and totally.

| Number of subjects | PM2.5, Mean (SD) | BC, Mean (SD) | pOC, Mean (SD) | SOA, Mean (SD) | SIA, Mean (SD) | O, Mean (SD) | Asthma (%) | Days to diagnosis, Mean (SD) |
|--------------------|------------------|---------------|----------------|----------------|----------------|---------------|------------|------------------------------|
| Total              | 18,253           | 7.36 (0.76)   | 0.53 (0.15)    | 0.46 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.81          | 19.16      | 11.35 (835 (428))            |
| Child asthma       |                  |               |                |                |                |               |            |                              |
| No                 | 163,333          | 7.37 (0.76)   | 0.53 (0.15)    | 0.46 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.81          | 19.16      |                              |
| Yes                | 20,920           | 7.31 (0.75)   | 0.51 (0.15)    | 0.46 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.81          | 19.19      |                              |
| Household disposable income level (tertiles)* | | | | | | | | |
| Lowest             | 58,776           | 7.31 (0.74)   | 0.51 (0.14)    | 0.46 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.81          | 19.20      | 11.92 (849 (432))            |
| Middle             | 59,564           | 7.35 (0.76)   | 0.53 (0.15)    | 0.46 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.81          | 19.17      | 11.52 (833 (423))            |
| Highest            | 59,397           | 7.42 (0.78)   | 0.54 (0.17)    | 0.46 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.81          | 19.12      | 10.66 (818 (425))            |
| Neighbourhood education level (tertiles)** | | | | | | | | |
| Lowest             | 61,488           | 6.87 (0.67)   | 0.41 (0.11)    | 0.45 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.81          | 19.52      | 12.75 (817 (419))            |
| Middle             | 62,433           | 7.34 (0.59)   | 0.52 (0.11)    | 0.46 (0.02)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.81          | 19.22      | 11.67 (830 (423))            |
| Highest            | 60,332           | 7.89 (0.64)   | 0.66 (0.13)    | 0.47 (0.02)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.81          | 18.73      | 9.61 (866 (444))             |
| Maternal education level (years) | | | | | | | | |
| ≤ 9                | 17,950           | 7.17 (0.7)    | 0.48 (0.13)    | 0.46 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.81          | 19.31      | 13.7 (805 (416))             |
| 10–12              | 56,885           | 7.22 (0.76)   | 0.49 (0.15)    | 0.46 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.02)    | 2.82          | 19.27      | 12.9 (823 (416))             |
| 13–16              | 100,696          | 7.48 (0.76)   | 0.56 (0.16)    | 0.46 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.81          | 19.08      | 10.21 (847 (434))            |
| > 16               | 2,223            | 7.59 (0.74)   | 0.58 (0.15)    | 0.47 (0.02)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.81          | 18.97      | 7.60 (963 (495))             |
| Maternal age      | | | | | | | | |
| ≤ 30               | 74,706           | 7.26 (0.75)   | 0.5 (0.15)     | 0.46 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.02)    | 2.81          | 19.24      | 12.54 (824 (422))            |
| > 30 ≤ 34         | 57,181           | 7.44 (0.76)   | 0.55 (0.16)    | 0.46 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.02)    | 2.81          | 19.1       | 10.69 (844 (435))            |
| > 34               | 52,366           | 7.44 (0.75)   | 0.55 (0.15)    | 0.46 (0.02)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.81          | 19.11      | 10.38 (845 (428))            |
| Maternal smoking   | | | | | | | | |
| Non-smoker         | 167,072          | 7.36 (0.75)   | 0.53 (0.15)    | 0.46 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.8 (0.16)   | 19.17      | 11.12 (835 (427))            |
| 1–9 cig/day        | 6,125            | 7.10 (0.74)   | 0.46 (0.14)    | 0.45 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.82          | 19.36      | 16.23 (782 (391))            |
| ≥ 10 cig/day       | 1,609            | 7.09 (0.7)    | 0.45 (0.13)    | 0.45 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.83          | 19.39      | 18.46 (764 (371))            |
| Maternal asthma    | | | | | | | | |
| No                 | 159,323          | 7.36 (0.76)   | 0.53 (0.15)    | 0.46 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.01)    | 2.81          | 19.16      | 10.12 (835 (427))            |
| Yes                | 24,930           | 7.36 (0.77)   | 0.53 (0.15)    | 0.46 (0.03)    | 0.28 (0.02)    | 2.82          | 19.16      | 19.23 (836 (431))            |

PM2.5: total particulate matter with a diameter of < 2.5 μm. BC: black carbon. pOC: primary organic carbon. SOA: secondary organic aerosols. SIA: secondary inorganic aerosols. Ox: oxidative potential. *Income measured as annual disposable income. ** Group-level (neighbourhood) variable.

Air pollution exposure

The exposure level, expressed as a mean value, over the first three years of life was estimated to be 7.36 μg/m3 for PM2.5, 0.53 μg/m3 for BC, 0.46 μg/m3 for pOC, 0.28 μg/m3 for SOA, 2.81 μg/m3 for SIA and 19.6 ppb for Ox. The correlations between estimated exposure to PM2.5 and the PM components were often high for the exposure window corresponding to the first three years of life, as shown in Table 2. For BC and PM2.5, the correlations between the three exposure windows were also high. The distribution of air pollutants and IQRs for the different exposure windows can be found in Table S2 of the Supplementary materials. A general pattern noted was the positive correlation between level of education, both at the individual and neighbourhood level, and between average exposure to BC and PM2.5. This was observed for all exposure windows and is shown for the first three years of life in Table 1. Children with a mother from the highest education category had, on average, 21% higher exposure to BC than children whose mother belonged to the Table 2
Air pollution correlations for the first three years of life.

|                | BC   | pOC  | SOA  | SIA  | Ox   |
|----------------|------|------|------|------|------|
| PM2.5          | 0.90 | 0.77 | 0.10 | 0.52 | 0.69 |
| BC             |      | 0.66 | 0.06 | 0.28 | 0.85 |
| pOC            |      |      | 0.19 | 0.57 | 0.37 |
| SOA            |      |      |      | 0.09 | 0.25 |
| SIA            |      |      |      |      | 0.10 |

PM2.5: total particulate matter with a diameter of < 2.5 μm. BC: black carbon. pOC: primary organic carbon. SOA: secondary organic aerosols. SIA: secondary inorganic aerosols. Ox: oxidative potential.

Similar results were seen for the associations between air pollution exposure during the first year of life and asthma incidence: all hazard ratios were non-significant and close to one in Models 3 and 4. Again, Model 3’s adjustments for neighbourhood level SES and municipality appear to be driving this occurrence.

For the associations between air pollution exposure during the first three years of life and asthma incidence, an increase in risk for PM2.5, pOC and SOA exposure was observed in Models 3 and 4. With an IQR increase in exposure, the HRs were 1.06 (95% CI: 1.01–1.10), 1.05 (95% CI: 1.02–1.09) and 1.02 (95% CI: 1.00–1.04), respectively.

In Models 3 and 4 where exposure during pregnancy and during the first three years of life were included simultaneously, the confidence intervals became wider for exposure during pregnancy, whereas estimates for exposure during the first three years of life seemed to slightly increase.

Table 3
Air pollution correlations between exposure windows.

|                             | Pregnancy - first year | Pregnancy - first 3 years | 1st year - first 3 years |
|-----------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
| PM2.5                       | 0.58                  | 0.60                      | 0.82                      |
| BC                          | 0.72                  | 0.72                      | 0.88                      |
| pOC                         | 0.08                  | 0.03                      | 0.35                      |
| SOA                         | 0.05                  | 0.20                      | 0.35                      |
| SIA                         | 0.32                  | 0.42                      | 0.58                      |
| Ox                          | 0.33                  | 0.29                      | 0.76                      |

PM2.5: total particulate matter with a diameter of < 2.5 μm. BC: black carbon. pOC: primary organic carbon. SOA: secondary organic aerosols. SIA: secondary inorganic aerosols. Ox: oxidative potential.

When testing effect modification by including neighbourhood level of education as tertiles in Models 3 and 4 for exposures during the first three years of life and asthma diagnosis, the effects of PM2.5, BC and pOC were found to be higher in areas where the population is least educated (p-value for effect modification: 0.01, 0.0001 and 0.03, respectively). The opposite was seen for Ox, with larger effects in areas populated by the most educated residents (p-value for effect modification: 0.008). The hazard ratios for PM2.5 corresponding to the tertiles of educational level were T1 = 1.10 (95% CI: 1.04–1.17), T2 = 1.06 (95% CI: 1.00–1.12) and T3 = 1.00 (95% CI: 0.94–1.06), all per IQR increase.

Similar, but weaker, effect modification was observed for neighbourhood income level. In the sub-analysis, in which children with asthma debuting within the first three years of life were excluded, precision decreased substantially, as only 2.6% of children in this study received their asthma diagnosis after the age of 3. In Model 4, the point estimates appeared higher than in the main analyses, except for SOA, which was unchanged. With an IQR increase in exposure, the HRs were 1.10 (95% CI: 1.01–1.21) and 1.08 (95% CI: 1.00–1.17).

Fig. 1. Hazard ratios (95% CI) for asthma by an IQR increase in mean air pollution concentrations during pregnancy. Model 1 is adjusted for child’s birth year, the child’s birth month and sex of the child. Model 2 is additionally adjusted for maternal smoking, asthma, age, parity, birth country, level of education, and household disposable income. Model 3 is also adjusted for ‘neighbourhood’ level of education, ‘neighbourhood’ income level and municipality. Model 4 is further adjusted for Ox or for BC in the Ox-model.

Fig. 2. Hazard ratios (95% CI) for asthma by an IQR increase in mean air pollution concentrations during the first year of life. Model 1 is adjusted for child’s birth year, the child’s birth month and sex of the child. Model 2 is additionally adjusted for maternal smoking, asthma, age, parity, birth country, level of education, and household disposable income. Model 3 is also adjusted for ‘neighbourhood’ level of education, ‘neighbourhood’ income level and municipality. Model 4 is further adjusted for Ox or for BC in the Ox-model. | Model | Total | Low education | Middle education | High education |
|-------|-------|---------------|------------------|----------------|
| 9     |       |               |                  |                |
|       |       | 8%            | 8%               | 8%             |
| 2     |       | 3%            | 1%               |                |

Fig. 3. Hazard ratios (95% CI) for asthma by an IQR increase in mean air pollution concentrations during the first three years of life. Model 1 is adjusted for child’s birth year, the child’s birth month and sex of the child. Model 2 is additionally adjusted for maternal smoking, asthma, age, parity, birth country, level of education, and household disposable income. Model 3 is also adjusted for ‘neighbourhood’ level of education, ‘neighbourhood’ income level and municipality. Model 4 is further adjusted for Ox or for BC in the Ox-model.

| Model | PM2.5 | pOC | SOA |
|-------|-------|-----|-----|
|       |       |     |     |

Fig. 4. Hazard ratios (95% CI) for asthma by an IQR increase in mean air pollution concentrations during pregnancy and the first three years of life. The models are adjusted for child’s birth year, the child’s birth month, sex of the child, maternal smoking, asthma, age, parity, birth country, level of education, and household disposable income, ‘neighbourhood’ level of education, ‘neighbourhood’ income level and municipality and for Ox or for BC in the Ox-model.

Fig. 5. Hazard ratios (95% CI) for asthma by an IQR increase in mean air pollution concentrations during the first three years of life by tertile of ‘neighbourhood’ education level. Two-pollutant models adjusted for child’s birth year, child’s birth month, sex of the child, maternal smoking, asthma, age, parity, birth country, level of education, and household disposable income. Model 3 is also adjusted for ‘neighbourhood’ level of education, ‘neighbourhood’ income level and municipality. PM2.5, BC, pOC, SIA and SOA are adjusted for O; Ox is adjusted for BC.x

Fig. 6. Hazard ratios (95% CI) for asthma by an IQR increase in mean air pollution concentrations during the first three years for children with diagnosis after three years of age. Model 1 is adjusted for child’s birth year, the child’s birth month and sex of the child. Model 2 is additionally adjusted for maternal smoking, asthma, age, parity, birth country, level of education, and household disposable income. Model 3 is also adjusted for ‘neighbourhood’ level of education, ‘neighbourhood’ income level and municipality. Model 4 is further adjusted for Ox or for BC in the Ox-model.

Discussion

Exposure to PM2.5 and the components pOC and SOA during the first three years of life were associated with increased asthma incidence in the first six years of life in this large, population-based administrative cohort study. In the fully adjusted models, the HRs of asthma in association with an IQR increase in PM2.5, pOC and SOA were 1.06 (95% CI: 1.01–1.10), 1.05 (95% CI: 1.02–1.09) and 1.02 (95% CI: 1.00–1.04), respectively. The increases in risk associated with particle measures were strongest in areas with lower education levels, suggesting possible effect modification or residual confounding by SES or by factors related to SES. Furthermore, neither air pollution exposure during foetal life nor during the first year of life was associated with asthma incidence. There are several strengths and weaknesses of the study. Exposure misclassification is a long-lasting issue in air pollution epidemiology. The women’s registered residential addresses were used to estimate exposure, which is a standard method. Exposures during commuting or at the workplace were not considered, resulting in, possibly differential, D. Olsson et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106667

exposure misclassification. However, the exposure model is based on estimates for smoking in the sibling comparison, which might suggest that smoking during pregnancy may be a proxy for ETS. Moreover, around 11% of the study population is not included in the final analysis due to missing data, mainly related to smoking status. Missingness for smoking status is most likely completely random, as this has to do with the routines of the primary health care centre and does not appear to be missing with any clear SES or geographic pattern. Associations were enhanced for children living in neighbourhoods with lower education level, which is somewhat in line with previous literature. Children from lower SES backgrounds seem to be more likely to have asthma and suffer from adverse asthma-related events, such as hospitalization. There are also indications that children living in low SES areas are especially at-risk for air pollution-related asthma emergency department visits or hospital admissions. It should be noted, however, that the opposite pattern was observed for Ox: the association was stronger in high SES areas, where nitrogen dioxide (local traffic) generally contributes more to Ox than in low SES areas. Despite adjusting for municipality as a fixed factor means that the local variation of air pollutants within the city is captured in the analysis. Although there may be limitations in using an administrative cohort regarding lack of data on important confounders, selection bias is not an issue, which is an advantage. Objective data on physician-diagnosed asthma as well as important covariates were available, which reduces the risk of information bias. Additionally, the definition of asthma outcome used included children who had been treated at the hospitals, either in-patient or out-patient care (most common). Children who had been diagnosed only at the primary health care or received dispensed medications for asthma were not defined as asthma cases. With this, the asthma definition has high specificity, but its sensitivity was likely lower. However, the prevalence of asthma was 11% in our study, which is not unreasonably low. It is difficult to compare asthma statistics between countries, over time and between studies given that diagnostic criteria may differ. Self-reported data often generate a very high prevalence, for example. Interestingly, there was a tendency for associations to be stronger for children where asthma debuted after the age of three, which might reflect reduced exposure misclassification in that group, uncertainties in asthma diagnoses in very young children, or differences in asthma etiology depending on age. Regarding adjustment for smoking, the quality of data on maternal smoking in the Medical Birth Register is high and has been validated with cotinine-levels. Data on maternal smoking is acquired through national registers, collected prospectively and are thus not related to the outcome. A further limitation is the lack of data on familial exposures before pregnancy. In addition to the mother’s smoking habits during pregnancy, results from a three-generation study suggest that even the grandmothers’ smoking habits during pregnancy and the father’s smoking habits in early adolescence may independently affect asthma risk in the offspring. Another study indicates that epigenetic mechanisms could be of importance for air pollution-induced asthma risk. Such findings were described in a separate study where mothers’, but not fathers’, air pollution exposure before conception seemed important, possibly suggesting a sex-specific mode of epigenetic transfer. While not on pre-conception exposure, results from an experimental study on mice suggest that asthma susceptibility can be transmitted transgenerationally, with exposure to diesel exhaust being the trigger. In the present study, mothers’, grandmothers’, or fathers’ exposure pre-conception was not included. Therefore, the possibility of the association observed being explained, at least partially, by such exposure pre-conception cannot be excluded. Additionally, it would have been desirable to adjust for environmental tobacco smoke (ETS), but no data on ETS was available. In another study, adjusting for ETS did not affect associations between maternal smoking during pregnancy and paediatric asthma, which may imply that the lack of data on ETS is not a substantial source of residual confounding. The findings of a recent Swedish study on smoking during pregnancy and asthma also indicate an attenuation of the positive associations between asthma onset and exposure to BC, NO2. D. Olsson et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106667

PM2.5 and PM10, with the least heterogeneity detected in the BC and PM pOC and Ox. This suggests that the temporal variation between seasons and years is stronger than spatial variation for these pollutants. Specifically, Ox was studied because it should reflect the effects and oxidative stress pathways associated with NO2 and O3 themselves. NO2 was not used as an indicator for vehicle exhaust to avoid obscuring the effects between NO2 and traffic-related particles. Moreover, the correlations with the PM variables are lower for Ox than for NO2 and ozone, which makes it possible to use multiple-pollutant models, where PM estimates are adjusted for NO2 and ozone. The pollutant(s) investigated may also explain some of the mixed findings between studies. In a recent meta-analysis, positive and statistically significant associations were found between asthma onset and exposure to BC, NO2, PM2.5 and PM10, with the least heterogeneity detected in the BC and PM analyses and the most in the NO2 and NOx analyses. In the same study, an age-specific meta-analysis was also presented, as asthma phenotype and asthma prognosis may be related to one’s age at onset. The authors concluded that traffic pollution was associated with asthma phenotypes developing before age 3 but found that these exposures may not be associated with asthma phenotypes beginning after age 3. A recent, large questionnaire study from Canada also demonstrated a statistically significant association between NO2 exposure and early childhood asthma onset (age 0–3) but not for late childhood asthma onset in age 4–9. Our findings seem to be in line with the results from an administrative cohort with data on 1,130,855 singleton live births in Ontario, Canada. In that study, associations between childhood asthma and childhood exposure to PM2.5 were seen, whereas associations within other exposure windows were reported to be less clear. Thus, the results do not support any threshold for adverse effects of air pollution.

5. Conclusions
The results indicate that exposure to air pollution, in the form of PM2.5 and PM components pOC and SOA, in the first three years of life may increase asthma risk in young children. Further, our findings suggest that children living in areas characterised by low SES may be more susceptible to these air pollutants, and BC, as risk factors for paediatric asthma. As the present study was undertaken in an area with relatively high air quality, these results highlight air pollution’s adverse health effects even at low concentration levels.

The correlation between different exposure windows was, as expected, quite high for BC and total PM2.5, likely because the pollutants’ spatial variation within this rather small area is heavily influenced by traffic and other emission characteristics of the surrounding area. Because the study population was very large, it was possible to include exposure during foetal life and the first three years of life in the same statistical model. When doing so, the associations between exposure during the first three years of life and asthma incidence did not change substantially. This implies that our study was able to distinguish risks at different exposure windows, specifically exposure during foetal life and exposure during early life. In contrast to these local sources, total PM2.5 also includes SIA and SOA, which are long-range transported in the atmosphere, as well as mineral dust and sea salt. Indeed, low correlations were found between exposure windows for SIA and SOA. Acknowledgments

This work was funded by NordicWelfair (NordForsk under the Nordic program on health and welfare grant agreement number 75007) and Formas Ved (DNR 2017-00898).

The authors would like to thank Erin Flanagan for help with language proofreading and editing.

Appendix A. Supplementary material

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2021.106667. D. Olsson et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106667

validation of self-reported smoking during pregnancy in the Swedish Medical Birth Register. Nicotine Tob. Res. 18, 79–83.
Mölter, Anna, Simpson, Angela, Berdel, Dietrich, Brunekreef, Bert, Custovic, Adnan, Cyrys, Josef, de Jongste, Johan, De Vocht, Frank, Fuertes, Elaine, Gehring, Ulrike, 2015. A multicentre study of air pollution exposure and childhood asthma prevalence: the ESCAPE project. Eur. Respir. J. 45, 610–624.
Munoz-Pizza, Dalia M., Villada-Canela, Mariana, Reyna, M.A., Texcalac-Sangrador, José Luis, Osornio-Vargas, Alvaro R., 2020. Air pollution and children’s respiratory health: a scoping review of socioeconomic status as an effect modifier. Int. J. Public Health 1–12.
Murrison, Liza Bronner, Brandt, Eric B., Myers, Jocelyn Biagini, Khurana Hershey, Gurjit K., 2019. Environmental exposures and mechanisms in allergy and asthma development. J. Clin. Investig. 129, 1504–1515.
Neidell, Matthew J., 2004. Air pollution, health, and socio-economic status: the effect of outdoor air quality on childhood asthma. J. Health Econ. 23, 1209–1236.
O’Lenick, Cassandra R., Winquist, Andrea, Mulholland, James A., Friberg, Mariel D., Chang, Howard H., Kramer, Michael R., Darrow, Lyndsey A., Sarnat, Stefanie Ebelt, 2017. Assessment of neighbourhood-level socioeconomic status as a modifier of air pollution–asthma associations among children in Atlanta. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 71, 129–136.
Olsson, David, Johansson, Christer, Forsberg, Bertil, 2020. Associations between Vehicle Exhaust Particles and Ozone at Home Address and Birth Weight. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 17, 3836.
Olsson, David, Mogren, Ingrid, Forsberg, Bertil, 2013. Air pollution exposure in early pregnancy and adverse pregnancy outcomes: a register-based cohort study. BMJ open 3.
Orellano, Pablo, Quaranta, Nancy, Reynoso, Julieta, Balbi, Brenda, Vasquez, Julia, 2017. Effect of outdoor air pollution on asthma exacerbations in children and adults: systematic review and multilevel meta-analysis. PLoS ONE 12, e0174050.
Ortqvist, Anne K, Lundholm, Cecilia, Wettermark, Björn, Ludvigsson, Jonas F, Ye, Weimin, Almqvist, Catarina, 2013. Validation of asthma and eczema in population-based Swedish drug and patient registers. Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf. 22, 850–860.
Oudin, Anna, Bråbäck, Lennart, Åstrom, Daniel Oudin, Forsberg, Bertil, 2017. Air pollution and dispensed medications for asthma, and possible effect modifiers related to mental health and socio-economy: a longitudinal cohort study of Swedish children and adolescents. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 14, 1392.
Paunu, V.V., Karvosenoja, N., Segersson, D., Lopez-Aparicio, S., Nielsen, O.K., Plejdrup, M.S., Vo, D.T., Thorsteinsson, T., Johansson, L., Kupiainen, K., 2018. Comparison of a new emission inventory for the nordic countries and global inventories. In: 11th International Conference on Air Quality Science and Application. Proceedings.
Pearce, Neil, Aït-Khaled, Nadia, Beasley, Richard, Mallol, Javier, Keil, Ulrich, Mitchell, Ed, Robertson, Colin, 2007. Worldwide trends in the prevalence of asthma symptoms: phase III of the International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood (ISAAC). Thorax, 62, 758–766.
Perez, Laura, Declercq, Christophe, Iñiguez, Carmen, Aguilera, Inmaculada, Badaloni, Chiara, Ballester, Ferran, Bouland, Catherine, Chanel, Olivier, Cirarda, Francisco B., Forastiere, Francesco, 2013. Chronic burden of near-roadway traffic pollution in 10 European cities (APHEKOM network). Eur. Respir. J. 42, 594–605.
Pierangeli, I., Nieuwenhuijsen, M.J., Cirach, M., Rojas-Rueda, D., 2020. Health equity and burden of childhood asthma-related to air pollution in Barcelona. Environ. Res. 109067.
Raaschou-Nielsen, Ole, Thorsteinson, Erla, Antonsen, Sussie, Holst, Gitte J., Sigsgaard, Torben, Geels, Camilla, Frohn, Lise M., Christensen, Jesper H., Brandt, Jørgen, Pedersen, Carsten B., Hvidtfeldt, Ulla A., 2020. Long-term exposure to air pollution and mortality in the Danish population a nationwide study. EClinicalMedicine 28, 100605.
Schwartz, Joel, 2004. Air pollution and children’s health. Pediatrics 113, 1037–1043.
Simons, Elinor, To, Teresa, Moineddin, Rahim, Stieb, David, Dell, Sharon D., 2014. ‘Maternal second-hand smoke exposure in pregnancy is associated with childhood asthma development. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. Pract. 2 (201–07), e3.
Stafoggia, Massimo, Breitner, Susanne, Hampel, Regina, Basagaña, Xavier, 2017. Statistical approaches to address multi-pollutant mixtures and multiple exposures: the state of the science. Current Environ. Health Reports 4, 481–490.
Wenzel, Sally E., 2012. Asthma phenotypes: the evolution from clinical to molecular approaches. Nat. Med. 18, 716.
Wright, Rosalind J., Brunst, Kelly J., 2013. Programming of respiratory health in childhood: influence of outdoor air pollution. Curr. Opin. Pediatr. 25, 232–239. 