Environment International 155 (2021) 106601

Interaction of prenatal bisphenols, maternal nutrients, and toxic metal exposures on neurodevelopment of 2-year-olds in the APrON cohort

**Keywords:**
Bisphenol A
Bisphenol S
Heavy metals
Maternal nutrients
Neurodevelopment

**Background:**
Epidemiological studies suggest that Bisphenol-A (BPA) is a developmental neurotoxicant, but the modifying effects of maternal nutrient status or neurotoxicant metal co-exposures have not been reported. Bisphenol-S (BPS) is being used as a BPA-alternative, but few epidemiological studies have evaluated its effects.

**Objectives:**
To examine if prenatal maternal BPA or BPS exposure are associated with children’s neurodevelopment at two years of age while adjusting for effect-measure modification by sex, maternal nutrients, and co-exposure to neurotoxic metals.

**Methods:**
Total BPA and BPS concentrations were analyzed in spot maternal urine from the second trimester; metals and maternal nutrient status were analyzed in blood. Child neurodevelopment was evaluated with the Bayley Scales of Infant Development-III (Bayley-III) at age 2 (394 maternal-child pairs) and linear regression was used to investigate associations.

**Results:**
Among nutrients and neurotoxic metals, selenium (Se) and cadmium (Cd) were the most significant predictors of Bayley-III scale scores. Higher maternal Cd was significantly correlated with poorer motor performance (p < 0.01), and higher levels of maternal Se were significantly associated with poorer performance on the cognitive, motor, and adaptive behavior scales (p < 0.05). While maternal Cd did not modify relationships between bisphenol exposures and Bayley-III scores, both maternal Se and child sex were significant effect-measure modifiers. Associations between BPA exposure and social emotional scores were negative for boys (p = 0.056) but positive for girls (p = 0.046). Higher exposure to bisphenols was associated with lower motor scores among children with lower levels of maternal Se.

**Conclusion:**
Higher maternal Cd was associated with poorer motor development, but it was not an effect-measure modifier of bisphenols’ effects on motor development. Maternal Se may be protective against adverse effects of bisphenols, and additional nutrient-bisphenol interaction studies examining sex-specific effects of BPA and BPS on child development are warranted.

1. Introduction

Bisphenol A (BPA) is an endocrine disruptor that is widely used in manufacturing of polycarbonate plastics and epoxy resins, and is present in many products such as food and liquid containers, children’s toys, medical devices, and on thermal receipt papers. BPA is frequently detectable in human biofluids and, according to national biomonitoring in Canada (2012–2013) and the USA (2003–2012), approximately 90% of the general population have detectable urinary BPA (i.e. > 0.2 or > 0.4 ng total BPA/mL, respectively). Exposure to BPA is mainly through the diet, which is also an important exposure source of classic heavy metal neurotoxicants. For example, high levels of cadmium and arsenic are detected in canned fish, which is also an important exposure source of BPA. Adverse effects caused by co-exposure to such neurotoxic metals in the diet could therefore confound the true relationship between BPA exposure and children’s neurodevelopment. More broadly, maternal dietary intake of micronutrients is very important for fetal growth and development, including behaviour and cognitive function. To our knowledge, previous neurodevelopmental epidemiological studies of BPA exposure have not adjusted for the harmful effects of neurotoxic metal and potentially beneficial co-exposures to micronutrients.

In animal studies, perinatal exposure to BPA causes alterations in the developing brain, such as fewer cells in the cortical plate and among midbrain dopamine neurons, as well as adverse psychological effects such as social and anxiety-related behaviors in juveniles and adults; however, the observed effects varied with dose and sex. Associations between prenatal BPA exposure and behaviors in children have also been observed in epidemiological studies, but reported sex-specific effects have differed among studies. For example, prenatal BPA exposure was positively associated with externalizing problems for girls at age 2, and anxious and depressed behavior among girls at age 3, while negative or null associations were found among boys. In contrast, higher prenatal BPA exposure was associated with significantly more problems in emotional reactivity and aggression among boys between 3 and 5 years of age, compared to fewer problems of anxious/depressed and aggressive behavior among girls. The varying sex-specific effects associated with prenatal BPA exposure may be due to genetic differences between study populations, unexamined co-exposures, or uncontrolled covariates.

Due to increasing scientific scrutiny and regulatory restrictions on BPA, alternative bisphenols such as bisphenol S (BPS) are increasingly being used. Biomonitoring shows that BPS is detectable (>0.02 ng/mL) in 81% of urine samples collected in the USA, China, and in other Asian countries. To date, urinary concentrations of BPS are much lower than BPA in the general population, but exposure is increasing. In embryonic zebrafish, low-dose BPS treatment resulted in a 240% increase in hypothalamic neurogenesis, which was greater than the effect caused by BPA at the same dose. The neurodevelopmental effects of prenatal BPS exposure have only been evaluated in two epidemiological studies to date. In a Chinese population (n = 456), children’s mental and psychomotor development was assessed using the Bayley Scales of Infant Development (BSID-I) at age of 2, and the results showed that psychomotor development index scores decreased across increasing quartiles of BPS exposure. Our previous study reported no significant association between pre- or postnatal BPS exposure on executive functioning in children (n = 312) at 2 and 4 years of age, assessed using the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function-Preschool Version (BRIEF-P).

Here we measured maternal exposure to BPA and BPS in pregnancy and examined associations with child neurodevelopment at age 2, assessed using the Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development – Third Edition (Bayley-III). A unique aspect of this study was a rich dataset for evaluating potential confounding factors and effect-measure modification based on maternal nutrients [iron (Fe), zinc (Zn), copper (Cu), selenium (Se), manganese (Mn), docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), arachidonic acid (AA), vitamin B12, choline, and folate] and co-exposure to neurotoxic metals [i.e. total mercury (Hg), total lead (Pb), total cadmium (Cd) and total arsenic (As)]. The four selected neurotoxic metals were frequently detected in human samples, and their developmental neurotoxicity has been observed in both animal and epidemiological studies.

## 2. Methods

### 2.1. Study population and samples

All biofluid samples and data were from mothers and children participating in the Alberta Pregnancy Outcomes and Nutrition (APrON) study. From 2009 to 2012, 1938 pregnant women residing in Calgary (Alberta, Canada) were recruited into this longitudinal cohort study. All protocols for APrON and this sub-study were reviewed and approved by health research ethics boards at the Universities of Alberta and Calgary and participants provided informed consent at time of recruitment, as well as prior to neurodevelopmental testing of children. Participants completed questionnaires at the time of recruitment on sociodemographics, including maternal age, ethnicity, education level and family income. Women provided blood samples and food consumption data for evaluating the maternal status of nutrients and co-exposure of heavy metals during pregnancy. A summary of recruitment and all inclusion and exclusion criteria are detailed in Fig. S1. For the current study, we included women who provided maternal urine samples in the second trimester (mean ± standard deviation (SD): 17 ± 1.7 weeks of gestation) in Calgary. This timing was decided based on a study by Braun et al. who reported that early gestational exposure to BPA (16 weeks) was more strongly correlated with child behavioural outcomes than later exposure (i.e. 26 weeks). Due to the developmental neurotoxicity of tobacco smoke, we also limited inclusion to women who self-reported as non-smokers, or who had quit smoking during pregnancy, resulting in 467 eligible women. From among eligible women invited to participate, 394 mother-child pairs presented for neurodevelopmental testing at age 2 (mean ± SD: 30 ± 1.4 months).

### 2.2. Analysis of biological samples

The collection time of biofluids and questionnaires for evaluating bisphenols, heavy metals and nutrients are listed in Table S1. Maternal red blood cells collected during second trimester were analyzed at the Alberta Centre for Toxicology (University of Calgary) with an inductively coupled plasma – triple quadrupole mass spectrometer to assess maternal heavy metals (i.e., As, Cd, Pb, Hg) and maternal nutrient status (Cu, Zn, Mn and Se). This method has been described previously. The methods of nutrient analysis were previously described. In summary, serum ferritin, plasma vitamin B12 and red blood cell folate were determined by AXSYM® analyser; whole blood hemoglobin was assessed using a hand-held analyser; serum phospholipid content of DHA and AA were analyzed in maternal second trimester samples using a modified Folch method combined with gas chromatography as previously described. Dietary intake of choline was estimated in the second trimester from 24 h dietary recall questionnaires. For a small portion of mothers who did not have data available for fatty acids, choline, and hemoglobin in the second trimester, their status for these nutrients in the first trimester (fatty acids) or third trimester (choline and hemoglobin) were used. An independent t-test showed that the status of each of these nutrients in the second trimester was not significantly different compared with their status in the selected alternate period (first or third trimester) among 400 participating women. Total BPA and BPS were quantified in spot maternal urine samples. collected in sterile urine cups, immediately aliquoted into 9 mL cryovials and stored at 80◦C. The potential for contamination of target analytes during sampling or storage was tested using HPLC grade water as a surrogate matrix for urine during the process of sample collection, storage and analysis (n = 20). Total concentrations of BPA and BPS (i.e. after deconjugation by β-glucuronidase and sulfatase) were quantified by online solid-phase extraction coupled to high performance liquid chromatography and an Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) as described previously. Limits of detection (LODs) were 0.32 ng/mL for BPA and 0.10 ng/mL for BPS. No total BPA nor BPS were detectable in any of the quality control collection and storage blanks. To normalize the data for urinary dilution, analysis of urinary creatinine was carried out in corresponding aliquots at the Clinical Trials Laboratory, Alberta Health Services (Edmonton, Alberta).

A recent discussion on the accuracy of the indirect total BPA analytical method has been raised by Gerona et al., who found a discrepancy between the detection results from the direct analytical method (directly detect free and conjugated BPA) and the indirect analytical method (detect total BPA after deconjugating BPA metabolites back to the parent form). However, our quality control test showed consistent results from direct and indirect analytical methods. Calafat et al. also commented that the indirect method has been validated by both pharmacokinetic and laboratory studies.

## 2.3. Neurodevelopmental assessment

The neurodevelopmental assessments were conducted between 2013 and 2015 by psychometrists in the Behavioural Research Unit at Alberta Children’s Hospital in dedicated rooms. Psychometrists were trained on the Bayley-III and supervised by a registered psychologist. The Bayley-III is the most widely used measure of neurodevelopment in young children. It is an individually administered instrument that assesses development from 1 to 42 months of age. Development is assessed on five scales: cognitive, language, motor, social-emotional, and adaptive. The first three scales are administered to the child and the latter two scales are questionnaires completed by the parent or primary caregiver. The cognitive scale assesses play skills, information processing, counting and number skills. The language scale contains receptive and expressive language subtests and assesses communication skills including language and gestures. The motor scale assesses both fine and gross motor skills. The social emotional scale assesses emotional and social functioning as well as sensory processing, and the adaptive behavior scale assesses the attainment of practical skills necessary for a child to function independently and meet environmental demands. The Bayley-III composite scores were calculated for all five scales. Each scale has a mean of 100, SD of 15, and range from 40 to 160. Higher composite scores are associated with better performance on the Bayley-III scales.

## 2.4. Statistical analysis

Statistical analyses were performed with Stata (version 12.0; StataCorp LP, College Station, TX) and SAS (version 9.4; SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Concentrations of BPA, BPS, or metals below LOD (8% for BPA, 42% for BPS, <1–26% for metals) were assigned a value of LOD/√2. Due to the skewed distribution, concentrations of BPA, BPS (creatinine adjusted), heavy metals (As, Cd, Pb, Hg) and nutrients (Se, vitamin B12, red blood cell folate, Cu, Mn, Zn, DHA, ferritin and choline) were log10 transformed and analyzed as continuous variables. Participants who were included and excluded were compared with respect to demographic characteristics, urine collection times, and prenatal bisphenol exposure, with significant differences examined by Chi-square tests for categorical variables, the Cochran-Armitage trend tests for ordinal variables, and independent t-tests for continuous variables. Independent t-tests were used to test sex-specific differences in prenatal exposure to BPA and BPS, as well as Bayley-III scores. A paired t-test was used to compare prenatal exposure to BPA and BPS.

Linear regression was used to model children’s scores on the five separate Bayley-III scales (normally distributed). Our exposure variables of interest were urinary concentrations of the two bisphenols. Potential confounders considered in univariable models included maternal nutrient status (ferritin, hemoglobin, vitamin B12, choline, folate, Cu, Zn, Mn, Se, DHA and AA), heavy metal (As, Cd, Pb, Hg) exposure levels, child sex, family income, mother’s educational level, maternal age at child’s birth, mother’s ethnicity, gestational weeks of urine collection, gestational weeks at birth, and daily time of urine collection. The age of the children at time of assessment was not included as a covariate in any models because the Bayley-III scales use age adjustment in the final scores. Covariates eligible to be included in the main effect multivariable models were associated with at least one composite score of the Bayley-III in the bivariate analysis at p < 0.20 and also improved the final multivariable model compared with nested multivariable models (p-value of the likelihood ratio test < 0.10). As shown in Table S3, inclusion of the selected covariates decreased the Akaike’s Information Criterion of the final model. Multicollinearity was tested among covariates using Pearson correlation (for two continuous variables), analysis of variance (ANOVAs, for continuous and categorical variables) and Chi-square tests (for two categorical variables). Due to statistically significant multicollinearity among family income, educational level and age of the mothers, only the family income variable was included in the final main effect models; family income was significantly correlated with more outcomes compared to these other sociodemographic variables.

Among tested heavy metals and maternal nutrients, only maternal Cd exposure, maternal Se level and maternal Cu level fulfilled the selection criteria of covariates included in the main effect models. Thus, we planned a priori to test maternal Cd exposure, maternal Se level and maternal Cu level as effect-measure modifiers of associations between the bisphenols and all Bayley-III scores. As child sex was significantly correlated with all Bayley-III scores, we also tested the effect-measure modification of child sex for associations between Bayley-III composite scores and prenatal bisphenols exposure. These effect-measure modification terms were first tested one-by-one for each Bayley-III score, then the potential effect-measure modifiers were tested again after keeping significant modification terms (p < 0.05) in the models.

## 3. Results

### 3.1. Study population characteristics

Among non-smoking maternal participants who provided a urine sample in the second trimester (n = 467), the mothers were mainly Caucasian (88%) and relatively highly-educated (93% finished college or higher education). Median age was 31 years (interquartile range = 29–34 years) and most (83%) had annual family incomes greater than $70,000 CAD. According to Statistics Canada, median family income for young couples (25 to 34 years) in the recruitment region was $89,420 in 2012. Of the participating children, 51% were female (n = 200) and 49% were male (n = 194). The average gestational age of children at birth was 39 weeks (SD: ±1.8 weeks). Comparison of participants included and excluded from the final study population revealed no statistically significant differences with respect to maternal demographics, bisphenol exposure, child sex, length of gestation, or gestational weeks at time of urine sampling.

### 3.2. Biomonitoring of maternal samples

Total BPA was detectable in 93% of maternal urine samples, while total BPS was detected in 59% of urine samples. | Variables                                   | Cognitive                        | Language                          | Motor                             | Social emotional                  | Adaptive behavior                 |
|---------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Intercepts                                  | 155 (<0.001)***                  | 158 (<0.001)***                   | 189 (<0.001)***                   | 190 (<0.001)***                   | 255 (<0.001)***                   |
| Environmental Exposures                     |                                  |                                   |                                   |                                   |                                   |
| BPA                                         | 1.16 (0.47)                       | 0.303 (0.86)                     | 0.548 (0.76)                      | 0.116 (0.94)                      | 1.55 (0.31)                       |
| BPS                                         | 0.908 (0.50)                     | 0.828 (0.56)                      | 1.66 (0.26)                      | 1.13 (0.43)                      | 0.765 (0.56)                      |
| Cd                                          | 2.18 (0.41)                      | 3.23 (0.24)                      | 7.12 (0.016)**                   | 0.620 (0.83)                      | 0.609 (0.82)                      |
| Maternal Nutrients                          |                                  |                                   |                                   |                                   |                                   |
| Se                                          | 26.5 (0.017)**                   | 13.4 (0.25)                       | 25.6 (0.036)**                   | 1.42 (0.90)                      | –32.8 (0.002)***                  |
| Cu                                          | 4.68 (0.73)                       | 8.42 (0.56)                       | 11.1 (0.47)                      | 30.2 (0.035)**                    | 25.7 (0.056)*                     |
| Other covariates                            |                                  |                                   |                                   |                                   |                                   |
| Child Sexa                                  | 4.20 (0.001)***                  | 5.85 (<0.001)***                  | 5.74 (<0.001)***                  | 5.10 (<0.001)***                  | 4.78 (<0.001)***                  |
| Family incomeb                              | (<0.01)***                       | (<0.001)***                       | (0.056)*                          | (<0.001)***                       | (0.28)                            |
| Ethnicityb                                  | (<0.001)***                      | (<0.001)                          | (0.30)                            | (<0.001)                          | (0.032)**                         |

Note: concentrations of BPA, BPS, Cd, Se and Cu are log10 transformed.
a Male was the reference group.
b Overall p-value of the relationship using LR test in STATA.
* p < 0.10; **p < 0.05; ***p < 0.01. of the Bayley-III (p-value of interaction = 0.005, Table 2). In fact, for boys and girls the associations were mirror opposites (Fig. 1A). Specifically, among boys the association between maternal BPA exposure and child social emotional composite scores was negative (β = -4.4, 95% CI: 8.8, 0.12; p = 0.056), whereas the association for girls was positive (β = 4.5, 95% CI: 0.084, 9.0; p = 0.046). The social emotional scale evaluates the child’s mastery of functional emotional skills, such as self-regulation and interest in the world, communicating needs, engaging others and establishing relationships; a higher composite score indicates better performance. Effect-measure modification by child sex was marginally significant (p = 0.094) for the relationship between BPS exposure and child social emotional scores (Table S8). As child sex was also a significant effect-measure modifier of the association between BPA and social emotional scores, we tested both “BPA × child sex” and “BPS × child sex” interactions together in the child social emotional scores model. In doing so, “BPS × child sex” became non-significant (p = 0.20), and was thus removed from the final model for social emotional scores (Table 2), while “BPA × child sex” remained significant (p = 0.01) and was left in the model.

Among the nutrients and neurotoxic metals analyzed, Se, Cu and Cd were statistically significantly associated with Bayley-III scales and were included in the main effect models (Table S3, Table 1), and maternal Se, Cu and Cd were not significantly associated with exposure to BPA (Se: p = 0.17; Cu: p = 0.07; Cd: p = 0.78) nor BPS (Se: p = 0.77; Cu: p = 0.34; Cd: p = 0.62). Thus we tested for effect-measure modification of Se, Cu and Cd on associations between each of the bisphenols and the Bayley-III scale scores (Table S8). Modification by Se was observed for the relationships between both bisphenols and the motor scale in multivariable models testing the interaction terms (“BPA × Se” and “BPS × Se”) separately (“BPA × Se”, p = 0.059; “BPS × Se”, p = 0.026). Examining this further revealed that at lower levels of maternal Se, higher maternal exposure to the bisphenols was associated with lower child motor development scores; the associations disappeared and became positive as maternal Se levels increased; among children grouped by maternal Se levels, the slopes of the associations between BPA and motor scores were consistent with those between BPS and motor scores (Fig. S3); for both BPA and BPS, the slope of the association switched from negative to positive at the median value of maternal Se (median of log10 Se is 2.4; Fig. S3). We also tested the stratified effects of maternal Se after grouping the data by median maternal Se concentration (i.e. above/below, Fig. S4). Higher bisphenol exposures were associated with poorer motor performance of children born to women with maternal Se below the median, while the association became positive among children whose maternal Se levels were above the median. After including both of these interaction terms in the same main effects model of motor scores, only “BPS × Se” remained significant at p < 0.10 and was retained in the final model of motor scores (Table 2, Fig. 1B).

Examining the association between maternal Se and motor scores further revealed that the negative association was mainly driven by the data of children with highest exposure to maternal Se (A in Fig. S5). After excluding 5 subjects with the highest levels of maternal Se, the association between maternal Se and children’s motor scores became non-significant (p = 0.14, B in Fig. S5), while the interaction terms of “BPA × Se” and “BPS × Se” were still marginally significant or significant (“BPA × Se”, p = 0.089; “BPS × Se”, p = 0.035), respectively.

| Boys | Girls |
|------|-------|
| Coefficient (95%CI): 4.5(0.084,9.0) | Coefficient (95%CI): 4.4(-8.8,0.12) |
| p-0.046 | p-0.056 |

that allowed us to adjust for potential confounding and effect-measure modification by micronutrients and classic metal neurotoxicants on the relationships between BPA or BPS exposure and neurodevelopment of children. Although the neurotoxicity of the four heavy metals examined here (As, Cd, Hg, Pb) has been shown in animal and epidemiological studies, only higher maternal exposure of Cd was significantly associated with any of the Bayley-III scale scores: higher maternal Cd exposure was associated with lower motor scores (p < 0.05) in our final model. This might be due to the relatively low maternal exposure to target heavy metals in the present study. Including exposures of As, Hg and Pb in the final models did not change the observed significant associations or effect-measure modifications. Although maternal Cd exposure was associated with poorer neurodevelopment, it did not modify the relationships between bisphenols and neurodevelopment in the present cohort. Maternal Se had statistically significant adjusted relationships with 3 of 5 Bayley-III scale scores. Furthermore, maternal Se status was a significant effect-measure modifier of the relationship between maternal bisphenols and child motor development. Higher prenatal bisphenols exposure was associated with poorer motor performance among children born to women with low maternal Se in pregnancy, while the associations disappeared and became positive as maternal Se levels increased. As the variable with significant relationships with all Bayley-III scale scores, child sex was found to be a statistically significant effect-measure modifier of the relationship between maternal BPA and one of five Bayley scores, whereby associations between BPA exposure and social emotional scores were negative for boys but positive for girls. The sex-specific effects of BPA exposure on neurodevelopment could be explained by the ability of BPA to alter the expression of estrogenic receptors, as well as its impact on sexually-dimorphic brain development and behaviors. reported sex-specific effects of maternal BPA exposure on neuro-development of children A Chinese cohort study (n = 463) reported a marginally significant negative association between maternal prenatal BPA exposure and the Psychomotor Developmental Index (from the BSID-I) among boys at 23–26 months of age (p = 0.05); no significant association was found for girls and no sex-specific effects were reported for the Mental Developmental Index Inconsistently, Kim et al. reported a significant negative association between maternal BPA exposure and child scores on the Mental Developmental Index (from the BSID-II) among girls at 13–24 months of age in a relatively small study in the Korean CHECK cohort (n = 73); the association was positive but did not reach statistical significance among boys It should be noted that the maternal exposure to BPA (median: 1.2 ng/mL or 1.6 μg/g creatinine) in the present study was comparable with maternal exposure in the Chinese cohort study (1.1 ng/mL), but was approximately 3 times lower than that of the Korean CHECK cohort (4.0 μg/g creatinine) The relatively low maternal exposure in APrON might explain the limited sex-specific effects on neurodevelopment of children in the present study A systematic review also reported discrepant sex-specific effects of BPA exposure on children’s behavior among epidemiological studies The variability in the sex-specific effects noted from study to study may be due to the differences in exposure, age of assessment, sample size, covariates available for adjustment, or time of urine collection for BPA exposure assessment

Previous epidemiological evidence regarding the effects of prenatal BPS exposure on neurodevelopment in children is limited to two previous studies In a study in China (n = 456), higher prenatal BPS exposure (evaluated as a continuous variable) was associated with poorer psychomotor development assessed by the BSID-I (p = 0.07); effect-measure modification of child sex was not significant In contrast, in the present study, we did not observe any statistically significant associations between prenatal BPS exposure and any of the Bayley-III scores in children of the APrON study in our univariate or main effects multivariable models Similar to our study, another analysis also using data from the APrON study found no relationship between pre- or postnatal BPS exposure (evaluated as continuous variable) with changes in any of the BRIEF-P executive function indexes (which evaluate children’s behaviors relating to inhibitory self-control, flexibility and emergent metacognition) in children at 2 and 4 years of age We note that urinary BPS concentrations among the Canadian mothers of the APrON study (median: 0.12 ng/mL) were approximately three times lower than in the Chinese study (median: 0.42 ng/mL) Thus, differences in exposure may partly explain this apparent discrepancy

Se is an essential trace element for humans, as it is incorporated into functionally important proteins including glutathione peroxidase (GPx), an enzyme involved in cellular defense against oxidative stress Thus, the protective effects of Se against metal neurotoxicity has been reported previously, with likely mechanisms including antioxidant defense For example, in vitro and in vivo studies reported that Se pre-treatment mitigated Cd-induced toxicity by regulating reactive oxygen species and inhibiting mitochondrial membrane damage The current study provides the first suggestion of a protective role of Se against bisphenols’ neurodevelopmental toxicity A molecular-level interaction between Se and bisphenols has not been demonstrated experimentally to date, but in vitro and in vivo studies have reported that exposure to bisphenols induces oxidative stress by decreasing activities or quantities of antioxidant enzymes, including GPx These studies provide a feasible biological mechanism whereby Se might act in a protective manner to counteract neurodevelopmental toxicity of bisphenols It should be noted that the modification effects of Se on BPA and BPS were quite similar according to the direction of the modification, the slopes of the stratum-specific associations, and the switching point of the association slopes Further study is needed to investigate the potential protective effects of Se in relation to the combined exposure to bisphenols

BPA’s ability to disrupt DNA methylation at certain gene loci has been elucidated in animal models, and is regarded as an important mechanism linked to its effects on the brain and behavior Interestingly, the effects of BPA on DNA methylation were found to be counteracted by supplementation of methyl donors, such as vitamin B12, folate and choline, in animal studies This supports the hypothesis that dietary intake of these methylating nutrients might reduce the effects of BPA on DNA methylation and mitigate its adverse effects on neurodevelopment We tested this hypothesis in a sub-analysis of the current data, but none of the three nutrients (maternal status of vitamin B12 and folate, and choline intake) were protective against any adverse effects of bisphenol exposure on children’s performance in the Bayley-III scales One reason could be that there were not many women with poor status or low intake of these nutrients in the APrON cohort

A strength of this study was its ability to evaluate the possible confounding and modifying potential of selected maternal nutrients and neurotoxic metals on the neurodevelopmental effects associated with bisphenol exposures For example, the significant adverse effect of maternal Cd exposure was adjusted for in final models that examined the association between bisphenol exposures and motor development (Table 2) Nevertheless, it is also interesting that statistically significant negative associations were found between maternal status of Se and Cu and Bayley-III scores in the final models (Table 2), while maternal Se was protective against adverse effects of bisphenols on motor performance of children Se and Cu are both essential trace elements in animals, but excessive Se and Cu can be harmful to neurodevelopment For example, negative and inverted U-shaped relationships between maternal Se and Cu concentrations and neurodevelopmental outcomes of children (BSID score around 12 months) were reported in a Spanish cohort study (n = 651) in which the concentrations of these metals were at intermediate levels Examining our data further revealed that the association between maternal Se and motor scores was mainly driven by children with the highest levels of maternal Se exposure, and after excluding 5 participants with the highest levels of maternal Se, the negative association between maternal Se and children’s motor scores did not reach significance Taken together, these results all suggest that there may be a narrow optimal range for the effects of these trace minerals on child development

There are also limitations to this study that we acknowledge First, the neurodevelopment of children was evaluated only at 2 years of age, while it is known that neurodevelopment continues to change in later childhood For example, longitudinal analyses of children have revealed that aggressive behaviors decrease from infancy to adolescence In the APrON cohort, we are assessing neurodevelopment in the same children at ages 3–4 and 5–7 years; these data will be the subject of future publications Second, we did not investigate any neurodevelopment related biomarkers, such as DNA methylation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor in blood, which could be quite helpful to identify potential mechanisms of observed associations The third limitation of the current study is use of a single bisphenol measurement in spot urine to categorize early pregnancy exposure to BPA and BPS Maternal urine samples were not collected at a consistent time of day among participants, and we did not collect information on time of the last meal This limitation has been raised for epidemiological studies of BPA in the past While this remains a valid limitation, this criticism is largely based on the short biological half-life of BPA after oral exposures We have reported that the biological half-life of BPA is much longer when exposure is by the dermal pathway, and argued that the importance of the dermal pathway for total bisphenol exposure is greater than previously assumed. Moreover, if BPA exposure assessment in single urine samples was not representative, it would bias associations toward the null hypothesis, and thus does not detract from significant findings reported here or in previous studies. A final limitation is that APrON participants are mainly well-nourished and Caucasian with high levels of education and family income, and the effects observed in the present cohort might not be generalizable to populations with poorer nutrition or with higher socio-economic risk factors.

The present study reports the first evidence for a protective effect of maternal Se against adverse effects of bisphenols on motor performance of children. Additional nutrient-bisphenol interaction studies examining sex-specific effects of BPA and BPS on child development are warranted.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Jiaying Liu: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing - original draft. Leah J. Martin: Formal analysis, Supervision, Writing - review & editing. Irina Dinu: Supervision. Catherine J. Field: Data curation, Writing - review & editing. Deborah Dewey: Data curation, Writing - review & editing. Jonathan W. Martin: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Supervision, Writing - review & editing.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgements

Funding for the current research was provided through grants to Jonathan W. Martin (PI) from the U.S. National Institutes of Health (Exploratory/Development Grant Number 1R21ES021295-01R21), the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (Open Operating Grant Number 123535) and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC, Discovery Grant). Funding to establish the APrON cohort was provided by Alberta Innovates–Health Solutions. Jiaying Liu also acknowledges scholarship support from Alberta Innovates–Health Solutions, and from the Medical Science Graduate Program, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta. Alberta Health is acknowledged for supporting daily laboratory operations in the Division of Analytical and Environmental Toxicology, University of Alberta. We are extremely grateful to all the families who took part in this study and the whole APrON team, investigators, research assistants, graduate and undergraduate students, volunteers, clerical staff and managers. We acknowledge the significant contributions of the APrON Study Team whose individual members are: B.J. Kaplan, C.J. Field, R.C. Bell, F.P. Bernier, M. Cantell, L.M. Casey, M. Eliasziw, A. Farmer, L. Gagnon, G.F. Giesbrecht, L. Goonewardene, D. Johnston, L. Kooistra, N. Letourneau, D.P. Manca, L.J. McCargar, M. O’Beirne, V.J. Pop, A.J. Deane, and N. Singhal. Management Team: of N. Letourneau (current PI), R.C. Bell, D. Dewey, C.J. Field, G. Giesbrecht, C. Lebel, B. Leung, and C. McMorris. Legacy Members: B. J. Kaplan, C. J. Field, D. Dewey, R.C. Bell, F.P. Bernier, M. Cantell, L.M. Casey, M. Eliasziw, A. Farmer, L. Gagnon, G.F. Giesbrecht, L. Goonewardene, D. Johnston, L. Kooistra, N. Letourneau, D.P. Manca, L.J. McCargar, M. O’Beirne, V.J. Pop, A.J. Deane; J.W. Martin; and N. Singhal.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at. J. Liu et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106601

Jiang, Y., Li, J., Xu, S., Zhou, Y., Zhao, H., Li, Y., et al., 2019. Prenatal Exposure to Bisphenol A and Its Alternatives and Child Neurodevelopment at 2 Years. J. Hazard. Mater. 388, 121774
Kaplan, B.J., Giesbrecht, G.F., Leung, B.M.Y., Field, C.J., Dewey, D., Bell, R.C., et al., 2014. The Alberta Pregnancy Outcomes and Nutrition (APrON) cohort study: Rationale and methods. Matern. Child Nutr. 10, 44–60
Kim, S., Eom, S., Kim, H.J., Lee, J.J., Choi, G., Choi, S., et al., 2018. Association between maternal exposure to major phthalates, heavy metals, and persistent organic pollutants, and the neurodevelopmental performances of their children at 1 to 2 years of age-CHECK cohort study. Sci. Total Environ. 624, 377–384
Kinch, C.D., Ibhazehiebo, K., Jeong, J.-H., Habibi, H.R., Kurrasch, D.M., 2015. Low-dose exposure to bisphenol A and replacement bisphenol S induces precocious hypothalamic neurogenesis in embryonic zebrafish. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112, 1475–1480
Kose, O., Rachidi, W., Beal, D., Erkekoglu, P., Fayyad-Kazan, H., Kocer Gumusel, B., 2020. The effects of different bisphenol derivatives on oxidative stress, DNA damage and DNA repair in RWPE-1 cells: A comparative study. J. Appl. Toxicol. 40 (5), 643–654
Kundakovic, M., Gudsnuk, K., Franks, B., Madrid, J., Miller, R.L., Perera, F.P., et al., 2013. Sex-specific epigenetic disruption and behavioral changes following low-dose in utero bisphenol A exposure. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 110, 9956–9961
Lakind, J.S., Naiman, D.Q., 2015. Temporal trends in bisphenol A exposure in the United States from 2003–2012 and factors associated with BPA exposure: Spot samples and urine dilution complicate data interpretation. Environ. Res. 142, 84–95
Lewis, E.D., Subhan, F.B., Bell, R.C., McCargar, L.J., Curtis, J.M., Jacobs, R.L., et al., 2014. Estimation of choline intake from 24 h dietary intake recalls and contribution of egg and milk consumption to intake among pregnant and lactating women in Alberta. Br. J. Nutr. 112, 112–121
Liao, C., Liu, F., Alomirah, H., Loi, V.D., Mohd, M.A., Moon, H.-B., et al., 2012. Bisphenol S in urine from the United States and seven Asian countries: occurrence and human exposures. Environ. Sci. Technol. 46, 6860–6866
Liu, H., Wang, J., Mou, D., Che, L., Fang, Z., Feng, B., et al., 2017a. Maternal Methyl Donor Supplementation during Gestation Counteracts the Bisphenol A-Induced Impairment of Intestinal Morphology, Disaccharidase Activity, and Nutrient Transporters Gene Expression in Newborn and Weaning Pigs. Nutrients 9, 423
Liu, J., Li, J., Wu, Y., Zhao, Y., Luo, F., Li, S., et al., 2017b. Bisphenol A Metabolites and Bisphenol S in Paired Maternal and Cord Serum. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51, 2456–2463
Liu, J., Martin, J.W., 2019. Comparison of Bisphenol A and Bisphenol S Percutaneous Absorption and Biotransformation. Environ. Health Perspect. 127, 67008
Liu, J., Martin, J.W., 2017. Prolonged exposure to bisphenol A from single dermal contact events. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51, 9940–9949
Liu, J., Wattar, N., Field, C.J., Dinu, I., Dewey, D., Martin, J.W., 2018. Exposure and dietary sources of bisphenol A (BPA) and BPA-alternatives among mothers in the APrON cohort study. Environ. Int. 119, 319–326
Liu, Y., Zhang, S.P., Cai, Y.Q., 2007. Cytoprotective effects of selenium on cadmium-induced LLC-PK1 cells apoptosis by activating JNK pathway. Toxicol Vitr. 21, 677–684
Miodovnik, A., 2011. Environmental neurotoxicants and developing brain. Mt Sinai J. Med. 78, 58–77
Ma´cczak, A., Cyrkler, M., Bukowska, B., Michałowicz, J., 2017. Bisphenol A, bisphenol S, bisphenol F and bisphenol AF induce different oxidative stress and damage in human red blood cells (in vitro study). Toxicol. In Vitro 41, 143–149
Mustieles, V., D’Cruz, S.C., Couderq, S., Rodríguez-Carrillo, A., Fini, J.B., Hofer, T., et al., 2020. Bisphenol A and its analogues: A comprehensive review to identify and prioritize effect biomarkers for human biomonitoring. Environ. Int. 144, 105811
Mustieles, V., Fern´andez, M.F., 2020. Bisphenol A shapes children’s brain and behavior: towards an integrated neurotoxicity assessment including human data. Environ. Health. 19, 66
Novakov, N.J., Mihaljev, Z.A., Kartalovi´ˇc, B.D., Blagojevi´c, B.J., Petrovi´c, J.M., Cirkovi´c, M.A., et al., 2017. Heavy metals and PAHs in canned fish supplies on the Serbian market. Food Addit. Contam. Part B 10, 208–215
Patisaul, H.B., 2020. Achieving CLARITY on bisphenol A, brain and behaviour. J. Neuroendocrinol. 32, e12730
Perera, F., Nolte, E.L.R., Wang, Y., Margolis, A.E., Calafat, A.M., Wang, S., et al., 2016. Bisphenol A exposure and symptoms of anxiety and depression among inner city children at 10–12 years of age. Environ. Res. 151, 195–202
Perera, F., Vishnevetsky, J., Herbstman, J.B., Calafat, A.M., Xiong, W., Rauh, V., et al., 2012. Prenatal Bisphenol A Exposure and Child Behavior in an Inner-City Cohort. Environ. Health Perspect. 120, 1190–1194
Ple´caˇs, D., Pleˇsinac, S., Vuˇcini´c, O.K., 2014. Nutrition in pregnancy: Basic principles and recommendations. Srp. Arh. Celok. Lek. 142, 125–130
Rahman, M.M., Hossain, K.F.B., Banik, S., Sikder, M.T., Akter, M., Bondad, S.E.C., et al., 2019. Selenium and zinc protections against metal-(loids)-induced toxicity and disease manifestations: A review. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 168, 146–163
Rochester, J., Bolden, A., 2015. Bisphenol S and F: a systematic review and comparison of the hormonal activity of bisphenol A substitutes. Environ. Health Perspect. 123, 643–650
Roena, E.L., Wang, Y., Calafat, A.M., Wang, S., Margolis, A., Herbstman, J., et al., 2015. Bisphenol A exposure and behavioral problems among inner city children at 7–9 years of age. Environ. Res. 142, 739–745
Rudel, R.A., Gray, J.M., Engel, C.L., Rawsthorne, T.W., Dodson, R.E., Ackerman, J.M., et al., 2011. Food packaging and bisphenol A and bis(2-ethyhexyl) phthalate exposure: findings from a dietary intervention. Environ. Health Perspect. 119, 914–920
Schlotz, W., Phillips, D.I.W., 2009. Fetal origins of mental health: Evidence and mechanisms. Brain Behav. Immun. 23, 905–916
Slotkin, T.A., Skavicus, S., Card, J., Stadler, A., Levin, E.D., Seidler, F.J., 2015. Developmental neurotoxicity of tobacco smoke directed toward cholinergic and serotonergic systems: more than just nicotine. Toxicol. Sci. 147, 178–189
Statistics Canada, 2016 Distribution of total income by census family type and age of older partner, parent or individual. Available:
Tremblay, R.E., Nagin, D.S., S´eguin, J.R., Zoccolillo, M., Zelazo, P.D., Boivin, M., et al., 2004. Physical Aggression During Early Childhood: Trajectories and Predictors. Pediatrics 114, e43–e50
Vandenberg, L.N., Hauser, R., Marcus, M., Nicolas, O., Welshons, W.V., 2007. Human exposure to bisphenol A (BPA). Reprod. Toxicol. 24, 139–177
Vinceti, M., Mandrioli, J., Borella, P., Michalke, B., Tsatsakis, A., Finkelstein, Y., 2014. Selenium neurotoxicity in humans: Bridging laboratory and epidemiologic studies. Toxicol. Lett. 230, 295–303
Wahlen, R., Evans, L., Turner, J., Hearn, R., 2005. The use of collision/reaction cell ICP-MS for the simultaneous determination of 18 elements in blood and serum samples. Agil. Technol. Appl. Note, 5989–2885EN
Wang, Y., Wu, Y., Luo, K., Liu, Y., Zhou, M., Yan, S., et al., 2013. The protective effects of selenium on cadmium-induced oxidative stress and apoptosis via mitochondria pathway in mice kidney. Food Chem. Toxicol. 58, 61–67
Wolstenholme, J.T., Rissman, E.F., Connelly, J.J., 2011. The role of Bisphenol A in shaping the brain, epigenome and behavior. Horm. Behav. 59, 296–305
Wu, M., Xu, H., Shen, Y., Qiu, W., Yang, M., 2011. Oxidative stress in zebrafish embryos induced by short-term exposure to bisphenol A, nonylphenol, and their mixture. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 30, 2335–2341
Yaoi, T., Itoh, K., Nakamura, K., Ogi, H., Fujiwara, Y., Fushiki, S., 2008. Genome-wide analysis of epigenomic alterations in fetal mouse forebrain after exposure to low doses of bisphenol A. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 376, 563–567
Ye, X., Wong, L., Kramer, J., Zhou, X., Jia, T., Calafat, A.M., 2015. Urinary concentrations of bisphenol A and three other bisphenols in convenience samples of US adults during 2000–2014. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49, 11834–11839
Zhang, Z., Lin, L., Gai, Y., Hong, Y., Li, L., Weng, L., 2018. Subchronic bisphenol S exposure affects liver function in mice involving oxidative damage. Regul. Toxicol. Pharm. 92, 138–144 