# Microalgae-based technology for antibiotics removal: From mechanisms to application of innovational hybrid systems

## A B S T R A C T

Antibiotics contamination is an emerging environmental concern, owing to its potential risks to ecosystems and human health. Microalgae-based technology has been widely reported as a promising alternative to conventional wastewater treatment, since it is a solar-power driven, ecologically friendly, cost-effective, and sustainable reclamation strategy. This review provides fundamental insights into the major mechanisms underpinning microalgae-based antibiotics removal, including bioadsorption, bioaccumulation, and biodegradation. The critical role of extracellular polymeric substances on bioadsorption and extracellular biodegradation of antibiotics are also covered. Moreover, this review sheds light on the important factors affecting the removal of antibiotics by microalgae, and summarizes several novel approaches to improve the removal efficiency, including acclimation, co-metabolism and microbial consortium. Besides, hybrid systems (such as, microalgae-based technologies combined with the conventional activated sludge, advanced oxidation processes, constructed wetlands, and microbial fuel cells), and genetic engineering are also recommended, which will be feasible for enhanced removal of antibiotics. Finally, this review also highlights the need for further studies aimed at optimizing microalgae-based technology, with emphasis on improving performance and expanding its application in large-scale settings, especially in terms of technical, environmental-friendly and economically competitiveness. Overall, this review summarizes current understanding on microalgae-based technologies for removal of antibiotics and outlines future research directions.

## 1. Introduction

Antibiotics are substances with antibacterial, anti-fungal, or anti-parasitical activity, which are extensively used in humans and animals for prevention and treatment of infectious diseases, as well as in livestock industries for growth promotion purposes. Previous studies have reported that antibiotics consumption (data from 76 countries expressed in defined daily dose (DDD)) increased by 65% from 21.1 to 34.8 billion DDDs between 2000 and 2015, whereas daily consumption rate increased by 39% from 11.3 to 15.7 DDDs per 1000 inhabitants. Based on the current consumption rates, antibiotics consumption might increase to 200% in 2030, if no policy changes are put in place. Additionally, antibiotics consumption in livestock production evaluated with Bayesian statistical models is projected to increase by 67%, from 63,151 tons to 105,596 tons, between 2010 and 2030. Among the 228 countries investigated in the study, China was the leading consumer, followed by the United States. However, antibiotics administrated by humans or animals which can be metabolized or absorbed account for a small fraction, and approximately 50–90 percent of them are excreted via urine and feces, as a mixture of parent and metabolite forms. Consequently, released antibiotics and their metabolites subsequently enter into surrounding environments through multiple pathways, including wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs), runoff from fields into surface waters, hospitals, livestock farms, aquaculture farms, and pharmaceutical industries. Numerous groups of antibiotics have been frequently detected in the effluents of municipal WWTPs, secondary sludge and biosolids, surface water, groundwater, drinking water, and soil and sediments, with concentrations ranging from ng/L to μg/L level in water and μg/kg to mg/kg. Antibiotics contamination has gained increasing attention in recent years, owing to potential harmful risks posed by their residues to the environment and human health. Although relatively low concentrations were observed for most antibiotic residues in the environment, mounting evidences have demonstrated that they could induce adverse ecological effects on target- and non-target organisms, such as inhibiting the growth of microbes, altering microbial community composition and activities. Meanwhile, overuse and misuse of antibiotics could promote development and spread of antibiotic-resistant bacteria (ARB) and antibiotic resistant genes (ARGs), creating a strong selection pressure on human and natural microbial systems. Moreover, antimicrobial resistance has been characterized as a serious clinical and public health issue by the first global report of World Health Organization (WHO) in 2014. Concerns to human health included the following: (1) antibiotic residues ingested might alter the composition of human intestinal microbiome and induce the emergence of ARB persisting in human body, then further develop into human antibiotic resistance which will cause various diseases and even death; (2) antibiotic residues in the environment could create selection pressure on the environmental microbiome, and generate environmental ARB and ARGs, commonly known as environmental antibiotic resistance, which might be transferred to humans relying on pathogenic ARB or human commensal ARB. Therefore, it is critically important to control the environmental spread of antibiotics, especially for WWTPs, where provide suitable conditions for proliferating of ARB or transferring of ARGs.

However, conventional WWTPs are not currently designed to sufficiently remove some antibiotics. In fact, they also act as major sources of releasing antibiotics into the environment. To date, various techniques, including physical, chemical and biological treatment, have been developed for the removal of antibiotics. Among them, advanced oxidation processes (AOPs), characterized with strong oxidation capability and fast reaction rates, are demonstrated to be relatively effective in the removal of antibiotics. However, high operational and maintenance costs have limited their utilization in large-scale applications. Antibiotics removal by physical treatment can be accomplished using powdered- or granular-activated sorbent carbon, where antibiotics are removed by adsorption through phase-by-phase separation instead of mineralization, and the removal efficiency is significantly affected by background organic matter. Biological treatment remains the foundation of WWTPs, owing to its superiority to chemical and physical approaches. Common biological treatment, such as activated sludge treatment is usually incomplete, although bioremediation by pure bacteria isolated from activated sludge may enhance antibiotics removal. The main concern associated with these approaches relates to the potential for bacteria to develop antibiotic resistance and transfer ARGs. Given the current overuse and misuse of antibiotics, coupled with their recalcitrance in the environment, bio-magnification in the food web, as well as potential adverse effects on ecosystems and human health, there is an urgent need for development of novel cost-effective mitigation technologies for removal of a variety of antibiotics, across a range of industrial scales.

Recently, microalgae-based technology has gained scientific attention for wastewater treatment, with several advantages such as being driven by solar energy, efficient fixation of CO2, eco-friendliness, as well as being a potential feedstock for bioenergy production or other high value-added products. Moreover, it guarantees cost-effective remediation of various nutrients, emerging contaminants (ECs), and heavy metals in wastewater. Generally, microalgae exhibit great flexibility to survive and thrive in extreme environments, which makes them promising candidates for enhanced wastewater treatment.

In this study, current status of research activities and perspectives on the applications of microalgae-based technology in removal of antibiotics from wastewater are comprehensively reviewed. Specifically, this review provides an in-depth description of the potential mechanisms involved in microalgae-based antibiotics removal, and recommends several novel approaches and hybrid techniques that can be employed to promote the removal efficiency of antibiotics and improve practical feasibility of microalgae-based technology for wastewater treatment.

## Microalgal removal mechanisms

Previous studies demonstrated that the removal of antibiotics caused directly by microalgae mainly include bioadsorption, bioaccumulation, and biodegradation. Additionally, some antibiotics can be further indirectly removed by photodegradation and volatilization, with the presence of microalgae, or the microalgal treatment system itself. However, photodegradation and volatilization occurs under special conditions, which is not common and usually considered negligible. Therefore, this review mainly focuses on the underlying mechanisms of antibiotics removed caused by bioadsorption, bioaccumulation, and biodegradation. Moreover, this process can be separated into three steps: 1) a rapid passive adsorption via physicochemical interactions between the cell surface and pollutants, followed by 2) a comparatively slow transfer of molecules through the cell membrane, and 3) ending up with either bioaccumulation, biodegradation, or both in cell. A detailed description of these removal mechanisms are discussed below.

### Bioadsorption

Bioadsorption occurs when antibiotics are either absorbed into cell wall of microalgae, or onto organic substances, such as extracellular polymeric substances (EPS), excreted by microalgae into their surrounding environments. EPS are mixture of high molecular weight polymers from microorganisms, that comprise proteins (PN), polysaccharides (PS), nucleic acids, lipids, and humic substances, generally protecting cells from harsh environment. Microorganisms tend to excrete more EPS as an adaptive mechanism in response to antibiotics toxicity. EPS can be categorized into two forms: bound EPS are closely attached to microalgal cells, while soluble EPS are excreted by microalgae in suspension or weakly attach with cells. Due to their complex and diverse composition, EPS contribute to different functional groups such as carboxyl, amine, hydroxyl, and hydrophobic regions, thereby providing available binding sites for the adsorption of diverse organic and inorganic compounds. The interaction between antibiotics and microalgal cell wall or excretions (both collectively termed cell surfaces) is a passive and non-metabolic process. Functionally, bioadsorption is mainly achieved through adsorption reactions, ion exchange reactions, surface complexation reactions, chelation and micro-precipitation.

Owing to the increasing awareness of antibiotic contaminants, there has been an increasing in the number of published studies on the removal of antibiotics mediated by microalgae. Related studies have been summarized in Table 1, where microalgal species, experimental setup conditions and possible antibiotics removal mechanisms are listed. As shown in Table 1, bioadsorption is found to be one of the main mechanisms for removal of some antibiotics, and the reported bioadsorption capacities of microalgae are variable. It was observed that ## Extracellular biodegradation

### Bioadsorption; bioaccumulation and intracellular biodegradation

| Polysaccharides | Hydrophobicity of antibiotics; |
|------------------|-------------------------------|
| Proteins         | Bioadsorption                 |
| Lipids           | Microalgae Species            |
| Excreting        | Bioaccumulation               |
| EPS              | Antioxidant response          |
| Bound EPS (attached to cell wall) | ROS             |
| Bioadsorption    | Lipid peroxidation; Denaturation of DNA and proteins; Cell death |
| Soluble EPS (excreted in medium) | Phase I: Oxidation reduction; O1 hydrolysis reactions; |
| Extracellular biodegradation | Phase II: Conjugation with large and often polar compounds; |
| Eutering         | Intermediate products         |

Fig. 1. Mechanisms involved in the removal of antibiotics by microalgae.

adsorption of 7-amino cephalosporanic acid was quite rapid initially in 10 min, with adsorption capacities of 4.74, 3.09 and 2.95 mg/g for Chlorella sp., Chlamydomonas sp. and Mychonastes sp., respectively. In addition, the maximum adsorption capacities of Scenedesmus quadricauda and Tetraselmis suecica for tetracycline were found to be 295.34 and 56.25 mg/g, respectively. These results indicated that bioadsorption capacities of microalgae were highly specific to their physical and chemical properties, such as surface chemistry and surface area. The cell walls of microalgae and EPS mainly carry negative charges, due to the presence of dominant functional groups including carboxyl, hydroxyl, and phosphoryl. Hence, antibiotics with positive charge can be effectively adsorbed through electrostatic interactions.

Furthermore, microalgae-mediated bioadsorption rates of antibiotics have been shown to range from 0 to 100%, as summarized in Table 1. For example, azithromycin was effectively removed by Chlorella saccharophila (nearly 100%), whereas the bioadsorption rate of trimethoprim was less than 30%. Previous studies have shown that the adsorption performance varies, based on hydrophilicity, structure and functional groups of different antibiotics. Generally, lipophilic compounds have high bioadsorption affinity values to microalgae due to electrostatic interactions, while hydrophilic compounds exhibit low bioadsorption affinities and are more persistent in growth medium. The lipophilicity or hydrophobicity of a substance can be evaluated in terms of log Kow (octanol–water partition coefficient), with a higher log Kow value implying elevated adsorption of compounds onto the surface of microorganisms or the solid phase. Antibiotics with high log Kow values (>5) and high molecular weights tend to be easily adsorbed than those with low log Kow values (<2.5). Moreover, log D, a solid-water distribution coefficient of compounds at a given pH can also be applied to assess sorption mechanisms alongside hydrophobicity. Previous studies demonstrated that the removal efficiency of trace organic compounds with log D > 3.2 devoted by bioadsorption was over 85%, whereas for those with log D < 3.2 were less than 20%.

Since bioadsorption is a non-metabolic process, binding of antibiotics onto the microalgal surface occurs on both living and non-living microalgal cell surfaces, and the biomass of non-living microalgae has been proved to be a great potential biosorbent for the removal of antibiotics. In modeling wastewater, cefalexin (at 50 mg/L) was effectively removed by nonliving Chlorella sp. and lipid-extracted Chlorella sp., with adsorption capacities of 129 and 63 mg/g, respectively. Additionally, a maximum adsorption capacity of 295 mg/g removal of tetracycline from water by lipid-extracted Scenedesmus quadricauda was obtained. Generally, non-living microalgal biomass applied as bioadsorption agents have several advantages over living microalgae, such as no toxicity limitations, improved sustainability of algal biodiesel in an environmentally friendly manner, and reduction of operational costs. Although bioadsorption provides an alternative treatment option for some antibiotics, further studies are needed to improve the engineering feasibility of microalgal bioadsorption technologies.

Microalgae-based bioadsorption is highly dependent on the structure of the target antibiotic (such as its hydrophobicity and functional groups available for chemisorption), microalgal species acting as sorbent, and environmental conditions. To improve microalgal adsorption technologies in bioremediation, several approaches, such as bioprospecting for species with a high affinity for the target antibiotic, and preferentially adsorbing it onto the cell surface, have been proposed. Consequently, microalgae from Chlamydomonas, Chlorella and Scenedesmus genera have been identified, and are the most frequently used species for antibiotic bioremediation owing to their availability and great potential. Hyper-adsorbency by the microalgae can be achieved by optimising variables that influence the bioadsorption process, including biosorbent dosage, initial adsorbate concentration, contact time, pH and temperature, as well as stimulation of EPS excretions. For example, the removal efficiency of metronidazole by Chlorella vulgaris decreased with increasing initial concentration of antibiotics. Tetracycline bioadsorption by Scenedesmus quadricauda dramatically increased during a 60 min period, whereas its removal by Tetraselmis suecica was not time-dependent. Moreover, bioadsorption is a pH-dependent process, where pH affects both |Antibiotic compound|Microalgal species|Microalgal culture conditions|Removal mechanisms|Removal efficiency (Initial antibiotic concentration, μg/L, %)|Culture time|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|7-amino cephalosporanic acid|Chlorella sp. Cha-01|BG-11, 200 μmol m◦ C, 800 2 s 1, 26 ± 1 mL|Bioadsorption, hydrolysis and photolysis|20 μg/L, 93%|40 d|
|Enrofloxacin|Chlorella vulgaris|BG-11, 45–501 μmol m 2 s, 25◦ C, 200 mL|Biodegradation and photolysis|1 mg/L, 52%|15 d|
|Scenedesmus obliquus|Scenedesmus obliquus|1 mg/L, 43%, 15 d| | | |
|Chlorella pyrenoidosa|Chlorella pyrenoidosa|BG-11, 2000 lx, 25 ± 1◦ C, 1000 mL|Bioadsorption and biodegradation|40 mg/L, 96%|24 h|
|Amoxicillin|Microcystis aeruginosa|BG-11, 40 μmol m 2s 1, 25 ± 1◦ C, 150 mL|Biodegradation|5003 ng/L, 31%|7 d|
|Azithromycin|Haematococcus pluvialis|pre-sterilized synthetic wastewater, 4800 lx, 25 ± 2◦ C, 250 mL|Biodegradation|20 μg/L, 78%|40 d|
|Florfenicol|Chlorella sp. L38|BG-11, 5000 ± 100 lx, 30 ± 1◦ C, 200 mL|Biodegradation|46 mg/L, 97%|20 d|
|Flumequine|Haematococcus pluvialis|pre-sterilized synthetic wastewater, 4800 lx, 25 ± 2◦ C, 250 mL|Biodegradation|20 μg/L, 70%|40 d|
|Cephalexin|nonliving Chlorella sp.|BG-11, 86.2 ± 5 μmol m 2 s 1, 27 ± 2◦ C, 2500 mL|Bioadsorption|482.92 mg/L, 71%|5 d|
|Ceftazidime|Chlorella pyrenoidosa|BG-11, 2000 lx, 25 ± 1◦ C, 1000 mL|Bioadsorption|40 mg/L, 93%|6 h|
|Cefradine|Chlorella pyrenoidosa|BG-11, 2000 lx, 25 ± 1◦ C|Not determined|60 mg/L, 76%|4 d|
|Ciprofloxacin|Chlamydomonas sp. Tai-03|pre-sterilized synthetic wastewater, 2 300 μmol m s 1, 30C, 500 mL|Biodegradation|10 mg/L, 65.05%|9 d|
|Ciprofloxacin|Chlamydomonas mexicana|BBM, 45–50 1, μmol m 2 s|Not determined|2 mg/L, 13%|11 d|
|Metronidazole|Chlorella vulgaris|BG-11, 45–501 μmol m◦ C, 2 s, 25 ± 4 1000 mL|Bioadsorption|5 μM, 100%|20 d|
|Clarithromycin|Haematococcus pluvialis|pre-sterilized synthetic wastewater, 4800 lx, 25 ± 2◦ C, 250 mL|Biodegradation|20 μg/L, 62%|40 d|
|Selenastrum capricornutum|Selenastrum capricornutum|20 μg/L, 84%, 40 d| | | |
|Scenedesmus quadricauda|Scenedesmus quadricauda|20 μg/L, 43%, 40 d| | | | Q. Xiong et al.                                                                                                                           Environment International 155 (2021) 106594

Table 1 (continued )                                                               Table 1 (continued )
   Antibiotic compound  Microalgal species    Microalgal       Removal               Antibiotic compound             Microalgal species           Microalgal             Removal
                        (Initial antibiotic   culture          mechanisms                                            (Initial antibiotic          culture                mechanisms
                        concentration,        conditions                                                             concentration,               conditions
                        removal efficiency    (Culture                                                               removal efficiency           (Culture
                        and culture time)     medium, light,                                                         and culture time)            medium, light,
                                              temperature                                                                                         temperature
                                              and bioreactor                                                                                      and bioreactor
                                              volume)                                                                                             volume)
                        77%, 12 d)14,                                                                                99%, 40 d)4,                 wastewater,
                        Coelastrella sp. 3–4                                                                         Selenastrum                  4800 lx, 25 ±
                        (1 μg/L, 90%, 12                                                                             capricornutum (20            2◦ C, 250 mL
                        d)14, Coelastrum                                                                             μg/L, 95%, 40 d)4,
                        astroideum RW10                                                                              Scenedesmus
                        (1 μg/L, 61%, 12                                                                             quadricauda (51
                        d)14, Chlorella                                                                              μg/L, 30%, 40 d)4,
                        vulgaris 13–1 (1                                                                             Chlorella vulgaris
                        μg/L, 69%, 12 d)14                                                                           (89 μg/L, 30%, 40
   Oxytetracycline      Phaeodactylum         ALGAL            Bioadsorption                                         d)4
                        tricornutum (2.5      medium, 3500                           Sulfamonomethoxine              Haematococcus                pre-sterilized         Biodegradation
                        mg/L, 97%, 11         lx, 18 ± 2◦ C                                                          pluvialis (20 μg/L,          synthetic
                        h)15, the dead                                                                               94%, 40 d)4,                 wastewater,
                        biomass (2.5 mg/
                        L, 45%, 11 h)15                                                                              Selenastrum                  4800 lx, 25 ±
                                                                                                                     capricornutum (20            2◦ C, 250 mL
   Roxithromycin        Haematococcus         pre-sterilized   Biodegradation                                        μg/L, 88%, 40 d)4,
                        pluvialis (20 μg/L,   synthetic                                                              Scenedesmus
                        52%, 40 d)4,          wastewater,                                                            quadricauda (20
                        Selenastrum           4800 lx, 25 ±                                                          μg/L, 39%, 40 d)4,
                        capricornutum (20     2◦ C, 250 mL                                                           Chlorella vulgaris
                        μg/L, 34%, 40 d)4,                                                                           (20 μg/L, 88%, 40
                        Scenedesmus                                                                                  d)4
                        quadricauda (20
                        μg/L, 41%, 40 d)4,                                           Sulfadiazine                    Chlamydomonas                pre-sterilized         Photolysis
                                                                                                                     sp. Tai-03 (10 mg/           synthetic
                        Chlorella vulgaris                                                                           L, 54.5%, 9 d)7              wastewater, 2
                        (20 μg/L, 90%, 40                                                                                                         300 μmol m
                        d)4                                                                                                                       s 1, 30C, 500◦
   Sulfamethoxazole     Haematococcus         pre-sterilized   Photolysis and                                                                     mL
                        pluvialis (20 μg/L,   synthetic        biodegradation        Tetracycline                    Chlorella vulgaris           pre-treated            Bioadsorption
                        94%, 40 d)4,          wastewater,                                                            (100 μg/L, 93%, 4            wastewater,            and photolysis
                        Selenastrum           4800 lx, 25 ±                                                          d)20                         full-day
                        capricornutum (20     2◦ C, 250 mL                                                                                        outdoor tests
                        μg/L, 86%, 40 d)4,                                                                                                        (diurnal light
                        Scenedesmus                                                                                                               exposure), 20
                        quadricauda (20                                                                                                           ± 3◦ C, 2250
                        μg/L, 46%, 40 d)4,                                                                                                        mL
                        Chlorella vulgaris                                                                           Tetraselmis suecica          BBM, 110
                                                                                                                                                  μmol m     2s   1,     Bioadsorption
                        (20 μg/L, 84%, 40                                                                            (obtained biomass
                        d)4,                                                                                         after lipid                  25◦ C, 1000 mL
                        Nannochloris sp.      F/2 algal        Photolysis                                            extraction) (10
                        (100 mg/L, 32%,       culture                                                                mg/L, 49%, 3 h)21
                        14 d)16               medium,                                                                Chlorella vulgaris           synthetic              Bioadsorption
                                              10,640 lm,                                                             (2 mg/L, 69%, 16             wastewater,            and photolysis
                                              23◦ C, 500 mL                                                          d)22                         10 W PAR/m2,
                        Microcystis           Woods Hole       Biodegradation                                                                     25 ± 2◦ C,
                        aeruginosa (10 μg/
                        L, 70%, 12 d)17       Combo                                                                                               14000 mL
                                              medium, 1001,
                                              μmol m     2 s                         Trimethoprim                    Haematococcus
                                                                                                                     pluvialis (20 μg/L,          pre-sterilized
                                                                                                                                                  synthetic              Biodegradation
                                              20◦ C, 50 mL                                                           67%, 40 d)4,                 wastewater,
                        Chlorella             BG-11, 4000      Biodegradation                                        Selenastrum                  4800 lx, 25 ±
                        pyrenoidosa (1        lx, 25 ± 1◦ C,                                                         capricornutum (20            2◦ C, 250 mL
                        mg/L, 15%, 11         150 mL                                                                 μg/L, 42%, 40 d)4,
                        d)18, Chlorella                                                                              Scenedesmus
                        pyrenoidosa +                                                                                quadricauda (20
                        sodium acetate (8                                                                            μg/L, 30%, 40 d)4,
                        mM) (1 mg/L,                                                                                 Chlorella vulgaris
                        99%, 5 d)18                                                                                  (20 μg/L, 24%, 40
   Sulfamethazine       Chlorella vulgaris    BG-11, 45–501,   Biodegradation                                        d)4,
                        (1 mg/L, 17%, 15      μmol m     2 s   and photolysis                                        Desmodesmus sp.              BBM, 100               Not determined
                        d)9, Scenedesmus      25◦ C, 200 mL                                                          RUC2 (1 μg/L,                μmol m     2s   1,
                        obliquus (1 mg/L,                                                                            46%, 12 d)14                 20◦ C, 1200 mL
                        7.3%, 15 d)9                                                                                 Chlorella                    M   8a                 Not determined
                        Chlorella             F/2 algal        Biodegradation                                        sorokiniana (20023           medium, 80 1,
                        pyrenoidosa (10       culture          and                                                   μg/L, 60%, 23 d)             μmol m     2 s
                        μg/L, 69.93%, 13      medium, 3000     bioaccumulation                                                                    25◦ C, 300 mL
                        d)19                  lx, 27◦ C, 1500
                                              mL                                   Note: BG11(Blue-Green medium), BBM (Bold’s Basal Medium).
   Sulfamerazine        Haematococcus         pre-sterilized   Biodegradation      1(Guo et al., 2016), 2(Yu et al., 2017), 3(Liu et al., 2015),                      4(Kiki et al., 2020),
                        pluvialis (20 μg/L,   synthetic                            5(Angulo et al., 2018), 6(Chen et al., 2015), 7(Xie et al., 2020b), 8(Xiong et al.,
                                                                                   2017c),     9(Chen et al., 2020),           10(Xiong et al., 2017b),           11(Song et al., 2019),

                                                                                5 ## 2.2. Bioaccumulation

Bioaccumulation is an active metabolic process for uptake of antibiotics in living microalgal cells, where they bind to intracellular proteins or other compounds. Although bioadsorption is considered as the first step of bioaccumulation, not all pollutants adsorbed onto the surface of microalgae can enter into the cell to bioaccumulate. Antibiotics can be transported across the microalgal cell membrane into the cell via three major pathways: (1) passive diffusion, (2) passive-facilitated diffusion, and (3) energy-dependent/active uptake. Passive diffusion of antibiotics requires no energy, since some antibiotics can diffuse through the cell membrane from a region of high (external) to low (internal) concentration. Antibiotics with low molecular weight, especially non-polar and lipid-soluble ones, might pass through the cell membrane via passive diffusion due to its hydrophobicity. Bioaccumulation was previously observed during removal of trimethoprim, sulfamethoxazole, florfenicol and carbamazepine, where antibiotics entered into microalgal cells via passive diffusion. Additionally, alterations in the permeability of the cell membrane induced by the exposure of antibiotics or stress environment can also cause passive diffusion, a phenomenon that is attributed to membrane depolarization or hyperpolarization. Interference with the integrity of the cell membrane may also promote passive diffusion of antibiotics. For example, addition of 1% (w/v) sodium chloride significantly improved bioaccumulation of levofloxacin by *Chlorella vulgaris* to 101 μg/g, while those without sodium chloride was 34 μg/g. Passive-facilitated diffusion means that antibiotics move across the cell membrane with the help of transporter proteins, whose role is to mediate influx of polar molecules into the cell. The third pathway refers to an active transport process driven by energy, where antibiotics move against a concentration gradient.

Bioaccumulation is influenced by external and internal physico-chemical environments, including temperature, pH, contact time and antibiotic concentrations. For example, temperature was shown to significantly affect bioaccumulation of antibiotics in the planktonic food web. Specifically, the bioaccumulation factor of antibiotics increased with the mean temperature only at lower temperatures, but decreased with the mean temperature when it was higher than 19.5°C, 21.5°C for phytoplankton and zooplankton, respectively. On the other hand, bioaccumulation of carbamazepine in *Chlamydomonas mexicana* and *Scenedesmus obliquus* increased with increase in carbamazepine concentration and cultivation time. Similarly, with the increase of its initial concentration in the medium, part of florfenicol might be absorbed by *Chlorella sp. L38* (biosorption) and migrated into microalgae cell (bioaccumulation). Optimization of those physicochemical parameters may affect both the rate and quantity of antibiotics accumulated by microalgae, and protect the cells from any associated toxicity, thereby promoting antibiotics removal. In addition, several recent studies have been conducted to screen microalgal species that are both tolerant to anticipated concentrations of antibiotics and confer high bioaccumulation rates. Since bioadsorption represents the first step of bioaccumulation, antibiotics accumulating in cells must fulfill the necessary key criteria for bioadsorption. However, not all antibiotics adsorbed on microalgal surface can accumulate in cells.

Moreover, the accumulated antibiotics in microalgal cells might stimulate overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS), including free radical (superoxide radical (⋅O2-), hydroxyl radical (⋅OH), perhydroxyl radical (⋅HO2) and alkoxy radicals), nonradical forms (hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and singlet oxygen (1O2)). Functionally, ROS plays a vital role in regulating growth, differentiation and proliferation of microorganisms. Generally, ROS keep in cells at a baseline level, supporting cellular proliferation and metabolism, and they also act as key signal transduction molecules. In response to the exposure of antibiotics, the level of ROS increased in microalgae, inducing DNA and proteins denaturation, and causing cellular damage, mutagenesis and cell death, due to their strong oxidative properties. On the other hand, microalgae may deplete accumulated antibiotics in cells via metabolism, suggesting that accumulation can be seen as a pre-step for biodegradation. In fact, previous studies have also shown that combined accumulation and biodegradation in microalgae cells play dominant roles in metabolism of some antibiotics. For example, microalgae were found to effectively remove sulfamethazine and levofloxacin through accumulation and subsequent intracellular biodegradation, respectively. Conversely, antibiotics accumulated in cells can be further transferred and magnified through the food chain due to the primary producer role of microalgae, eventually posing potential risks to human health by inducing the development and spread of antibiotic resistance. Therefore, it is imperative to control the concentrations of antibiotics to prevent high accumulation occurring in microalgal cells and the associated risks.

## 2.3. Biodegradation

As previously discussed, microalgae-mediated bioadsorption and bioaccumulation play key roles in removal of antibiotics from the aqueous phase. However, bioadsorption is a phase transfer phenomenon, that simply acts as a biological filter for concentrating target antibiotics. This process is also reversible, with bio-absorbed antibiotics likely to be released into the aqueous phase. Biodegradation has been proven to be the most effective mechanism for microalgae-mediated antibiotics removal. For example, biodegradation was the dominant mechanism during removal of florfenicol (159 mg/L) by *Chlorella sp. L38*, where 72.0% of the antibiotic was removed, relative to bioaccumulation and bioadsorption which contributed 1.3% and 1.4%, respectively. Moreover, it was reported a 100% removal efficiency of ciprofloxacin by *Chlamydomonas sp. Tai-03*, with biodegradation contributing 65.05% of the removal. Investigated the ability of four microalgal strains, namely *Haematococcus pluvialis*, *Selenastrum capricornutum*, *Scenedesmus quadricauda* and *Chlorella vulgaris* to remove ten antibiotics, and found that biodegradation contributed between 23% and 99% of the removal efficiency.

Biodegradation is a complex process that involves breakdown of organic compounds, either through biotransformation that causes formation of different metabolic intermediates, or through complete mineralization to CO2 and H2O by pure or mixed microbial cultures. The underlying mechanisms of biodegradation can be classified into two categories: (1) metabolic degradation, in which the antibiotic serves as the solo carbon source or electron donor/acceptor. for microalgae; and (2) co-metabolism, in which additional organic substrates serve to both sustain biomass production, and act as an electron donor for the non-growth substrate. Microalgae-mediated biodegradation of antibiotics generally involves extracellular and intracellular biodegradation, or a combination of both where initial degradation occurs extracellularly, and the breakdown products may be further metabolized intracellularly. Intracellular degradation relies on the accumulated antibiotics in microalgal cells, while extracellular degradation depends on excretion of EPS by microalgae. EPS can act as an external digestive system, as well as a surfactant and emulsifier, to increase bioavailability of the antibiotics for subsequent bioaccumulation by microalgae. However, exact mechanisms underlying the interaction between EPS excreted by microalgae and antibiotics remains unclear, necessitating further studies.

Biodegradation relies on the cellular metabolism of microalgae, in which involves a series of complex enzymatic reactions. Microalgae-mediated biodegradation of antibiotics can be defined as a two-phase enzymatic catalysis process, based on enzyme functionalities. The first phase (phase I) processes entail addition of reactive functional groups, involving oxidation, reduction, or hydrolysis reactions. These reactions are catalyzed by microsomal monooxygenase enzymes or mixed-function oxidases, namely cytochrome P-450, cytochrome b5, and NADPH cytochrome P450 reductase. Consequently, different types of enzymatic reactions, such as carboxylation, decarboxylation, oxidation, hydroxylation, dehydroxylation, hydrogenation, methylation, demethylation and ring cleavage, have been observed during the phase I processes. Moreover, metabolites generated from phase I reactions have been found to increase polarity and hydrophilicity of xenobiotics, thereby facilitating excretion of certain compounds. Phase II processes entail conjugation of a xenobiotic or its metabolites, generated from phase I reactions, with large and often polar compounds such as sugars and amino acids, to further increase the water solubility of the xenobiotics. Xiong et al. reported that biodegradation of sulfamethoxazole by Chlorella pyrenoidosa might undergo phase I reactions, including oxidation and hydroxylation reactions of the amine group, followed by phase II reactions that comprised formylation and pterin-related conjugation. Additionally, xenobiotic compounds or their metabolites, equipped with the requisite functional groups such as–COOH, –OH or –NH2, can be conjugated with glutathione (GSH) or glucuronic acid catalyzed by glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) or UDP-glucoronyl transferases (UDPGTs). Moreover, the ability of microalgae to detoxify xenobiotics is similar to that observed in the mammalian liver, indicating that microalgae can be considered ‘‘green livers’’ for the detoxification of environmental contaminants.

Microalgae-mediated biodegradation of antibiotics is a highly complex process, that involves multiple enzymes from both phase I and phase II enzyme families. To date, however, the dominant enzymes regulating this process as well as elucidation of their respective roles have not been fully investigated. Over the past few decades, omics technologies combined with biochemical and microbial analysis have been proved to be promising molecular tools, offering robust details about the alterations of genes, transcriptomes, metabolites, protein expression, as well as their respective regulation involved in the biodegradation of micropollutants. Particularly, metagenomics technologies can be applied to screen and experimentally validate gene functions, identifying enzymes and metabolic pathways involved in the degradation process. Additionally, transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics have been utilized to unravel intricate molecular and cellular effects of microalgae in response to certain contaminants. For example, Wang et al. used transcriptome profiling to reveal molecular response of Desmodesmus sp. to bisphenol A (BPA) exposure. Their results revealed significant upregulation of genes that encoded oxidoreductases and glycosyltransferases in microalgae, oxidoreductases found to promote BPA oxidative biodegradation, whereas glycosyltransferases associated with detoxification. Patel et al. employed label-free shotgun proteomic analysis to investigate nitrogen uptake and metabolic of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii in response to wastewater processing. Their results revealed elevated levels of enzymes and proteins associated with nitrogen metabolism and assimilation, synthesis and utilization of carbohydrates, amino acid recycling, as well as evidence of oxidative stress, and lipid biosynthesis. On the other hand, multi-omics coupled with data analytics have facilitated further achieving a broad panorama of the inner molecular mechanisms of micropollutants biodegradation. Zhang et al. combined transcriptomic along with metabolomic and free radical analyses to explore the functional groups and detailed molecular mechanisms of sulfonamides biodegradation. Carbohydrate-active enzymes, oxidoreductases, as well as ⋅OH played particularly important roles in sulfonamides biodegradation. Even though omics technologies have emerged as promising molecular tools for the biodegradation mechanisms of micropollutants, their application in the research of antibiotics biodegradation is still in infancy and in-depth study is needed.

3.  Novel approaches for enhanced antibiotics removal

3.1.  Acclimation

It is crucial for wastewater treatment to improve the response of microalgae, which can be achieved by acclimating microalgae under harsh or limiting conditions, such as nutrient deficiency and toxicant exposure. Previous evidences indicate that acclimated microalgae have higher tolerance and biodegradation capacity than wild-type microalgal species, and guarantee better removal efficiency of contaminants. Microalgae acclimation has been extensively used to remove nutrients and micropollutants from wastewater. For example, Chen et al. reported that acclimated Chlorella pyrenoidosa, with 60 mg/L cefradine, resulted in a better removal efficiency. Similar results were found by Xiong et al. that Chlorella vulgaris, pre-exposed to 200 mg/L of levofloxacin for 11 days exhibited higher removal capacity (28%) of levofloxacin than wild species (16%). In addition, Liao et al. demonstrated that microbial communities incubated at a higher temperature (45◦C) for 28 days exhibited elevated biodegradation of sulfanilamide. In another study, Cho et al. showed that Dunaliella salina acclimated with higher dosage of phenol exhibited significantly higher growth rate and elevated levels of fatty acid methyl esters than wild species. Overall, these studies demonstrate that acclimation is a promising approach for improving microalgae tolerance to contaminants during bioremediation and/or biomass production. The ability of microalgae to adapt to extreme conditions is attributed to genetic changes caused by spontaneous mutation or physiological adaptation. On the other hand, improved capacity of acclimated microalgae might be due to enhanced photosynthesis, carotenoid biosynthesis, antioxidant system activities or metabolism processes. However, the ability of microalgal strains to acclimate to various environmental stresses is species-specific, and requires an in-depth molecular analysis to elucidate the role of the stress conditions in improving removal of organic contaminants. ## 3.2. Co-metabolism

Co-metabolism refers to the transformation of a non-growth substrate in the obligatory presence of a growth substrate or another biodegradable compound. Additional organic substrates not only serve to sustain biomass production, but also act as electron donors for co-metabolism of non-growth substrates. Previous studies have shown that addition of organic substrates or other nutrient substances to form a co-metabolic system is an effective strategy for promoting microalgae-mediated biodegradation of persistent organic contaminants. For example, removal efficiency of ciprofloxacin by Chlamydomonas mexicana increased from 13% to 56% following addition of sodium acetate. Similar results were found in our previous study, with addition of sodium acetate significantly enhancing the removal efficiency of sulfamethoxazole by Chlorella pyrenoidosa (99.3%), relative to the control group (6.05%). Moreover, Liang et al. observed that the influence of acetate on degradation of 26 pharmaceuticals was dose- and compound-dependent. Particularly, acetate concentration was associated with both improvement of removal efficiency of parent compounds, as well as regulating transformation products and pathways. In general, co-metabolism can be influenced by various factors, such as reaction time, concentration of target compound, microalgal species, as well as type and concentration of nutrient substance. Among these factors, the type and concentration of nutrient substance plays the most critical role. The impacts of different carbon sources on micropollutant co-metabolism by microalgae have been comprehensively studied. Their results demonstrated that sugar-based carbon sources achieved the highest EPS and enzymes concentration, as well as a higher removal efficiency. However, presence of some organic substrates can lower removal efficiency of the contaminants, possibly due to catabolite repression. Therefore, it is necessary to evaluate the effects of various carbon sources, identifying the most appropriate and ensuring proper application in bioremediation of contaminants in wastewater. Meanwhile, this process will help to boost biomass recovery for several industries and improve revenue.

## 3.3. Microbial consortium

Recent studies have reported the potential of microalgal consortium in different applications, supporting production of biomass and biotechnologically valuable metabolites, facilitating treatment of wastewater in a cost-effective and environment-friendly manner. Consortium or co-cultivation cultures refer to a mixed culture of two or more microalgal strains, or an association of microalgae with other microorganisms such as bacteria or fungi, in cultures. Among the different possible consortium that can be established, microalgae-microalgae consortium and microalgae-bacteria consortium are the most commonly used for wastewater treatment. Microalgae-microalgae consortium are constituted exclusively by photosynthetic microorganisms (eukaryotic and/or prokaryotic), whilst microalgae-bacteria consortium are constituted by photosynthetic microorganisms and heterotrophic bacteria. Compared to the individual microorganism, the use of consortium in the bioremediation of wastewater exhibits two advantages. Firstly, occurrence of cooperative interactions between co-cultivated microorganisms enhance the overall uptake of nutrients and micropollutants; secondly, these systems tend to be more resistant to environmental oscillations. A comparison between microalgae-microalgae consortium and microalgae-bacteria consortium is summarized in Table 2, especially in terms of interactions established between the microorganisms, as well as main characteristics, cost and applications of the two consortium.

| Comparison                          | Microalgae-microalgae consortium | Microalgae-bacteria consortium |
|-------------------------------------|----------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Interactions                        | Cooperative and competitive interactions occur between different species of microalgae, which remain rarely known and need to be further studied. | Compared to microalgae-microalgae consortium, the higher biodiversity in the microalgae-bacteria consortium supports complex interactions between and within the attached microalgae and bacteria groups, which have been extensively studied, including cooperative and competitive (antagonistic) interactions. |
| Characteristics                     | Compared to monocultures, microalgae-microalgae consortium shows more stable biomass growth and improved contaminants removal; Allelochemicals produced by microalgae can exhibit adverse effects on the growth of co-cultivated microalgal species. | The complex interactions in microalgae-bacteria consortium facilitate the formation of a stable community structure and the maintenance of sustainable ecological functions, with a better and broader removal efficiency of contaminants than microalgae-microalgae consortium; Species selection is the crucial first step in constructing a stable consortium for continuous efficient wastewater treatment. |
| Cost                                | Microalgae can convert CO2 to biomass through photosynthesis, reducing CO2 emissions to the atmosphere; Aeration is usually employed in microalgae-microalgae consortium to promote the growth of microalgae and removal efficient of contaminants, which needs an extra cost. | Microalgae can sustain bacterial growth by offering organic carbon, while bacteria can reduce photosynthetic oxygen tension of microalgae by consuming O2 as electron acceptor; In addition, vitamin B12 and auxins secreted by bacteria can promote the growth of microalgae; Microalgae-bacteria consortium avoided external supplication of O2, reducing high costs. |
| Application                         | Microalgae-microalgae consortium is not commonly used for wastewater treatment, while being ideal candidate for enhanced biomanufacturing. | Microalgae-bacteria consortium is a promising alternative for wastewater treatment, achieving higher removal efficiencies and accumulating higher biomass products. |

A microalgae-microalgae consortium comprising Chlorella sp. and Scenedesmus sp. improved the biodegradation removal efficiency of ibuprofen by 40% and reduced the lag phase of caffeine by 3 days. Although the cause for the improved efficiency in contaminant removal by the microalgae co-cultures is still not well understood, studies have attributed it to the competitive/inhibitive and cooperative interactions between the different microalgal strains. Mendes and Vermelho postulated that metabolites exchange between microorganisms during cooperative interactions enhance biomass accumulation and consequently improve efficiency of nutrient and micropollutant removal. Xiong et al. evaluated ecotoxicity and removal of enrofloxacin by five individual microalgae species, namely Chlorella vulgaris, Micractinium resseri, Scenedesmus obliquus, Ourococcus multisporus, and Chlamydomonas mexicana, alongside their consortium. Results showed that the microalgae consortium was more sensitive to enrofloxacin (with a lower EC50) than the individual microalgal species. and its removal efficiency was comparable to that of the most effective species. Besides, the highest growth inhibition observed in the microalgae consortium might be due to allelochemicals excreted by microalgae or biodegraded products of enrofloxacin. Previous studies have shown that allelochemicals produced in the interactions between different microorganisms can affect growth, survival, and/or reproduction of other microorganisms. In addition, microalgae-microalgae consortium applied for biodiesel production has been demonstrated to be economically sustainable, and guarantees significant reduction of overall nutrient waste. The resulting increase in biodiesel production has been attributed to cooperative interactions between different microalgal strains, although the actual mechanism remains unclear.

Compared to microalgae-microalgae consortium, microalgae-bacteria consortium have been widely applied for wastewater treatment due to its lower energy demand, cost-effectiveness and potential resource recovery. As shown in Fig. 2, interactions between microalgae and bacteria in the microalgae-bacteria consortium cover a wide range of relationships from cooperation to competition. Generally, oxygen produced from photosynthesis by microalgae is available to heterotrophic bacteria for oxidation reaction of organic carbons, and the CO2 released during bacteria mineralization in return can be fed to microalgae for photosynthesis. Additionally, bacteria can supply fixed nitrogen, vitamin B12, and siderophores for microalgal growth, and microalgae provide dissolved organic carbon to bacteria. The direct or indirect cooperative interactions between microalgae and bacteria facilitate the microalgae-bacteria consortium with a better and broader removal efficiency of contaminants than microalgae-microalgae consortium. In addition to cooperative interactions between microalgae and bacteria, antagonistic effects on each other’s physiology and metabolism cannot be ignored. For example, bacteria may produce toxic metabolites that inhibit excessive microalgal growth; whereas microalgae are capable of releasing exotoxins that act as allelochemicals or growth inhibitors for bacteria. Although a variety of interactions between microalgae and bacteria have been identified, little is known about its inner molecular mechanisms. As most of previous studies have described microalgae-bacteria relationships from biological and physical perspectives, with only limited elucidation of these interactions at the molecular and biochemical levels. Therefore, an in-depth understanding into mechanisms underlying the interactions between microalgae and bacteria is necessary to motivate large-scale applications of microalgae-bacteria consortium.

| Nutrients | Metals | Micropollutants | Organic Carbon | Bacteria | Microalgae | CO2 | Fertilizers | Auxins | Effluent | Biomass | High value added products |
|-----------|--------|-----------------|----------------|----------|------------|-----|-------------|--------|----------|---------|--------------------------|
|           |        |                 |                |          |            |     |             |        |          |         |                          |

Fig. 2. The interaction modes between microalgae and bacteria. Table 3
Comparative summary of different microalgae-based treatments for antibiotics removal.

| Contents                       | Application                     | Characteristics                                                                                     |
|--------------------------------|---------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Conventional systems           | Suspended cells                 | Open HRAP                                                                                          |
|                                |                                 | Open systems cost less in terms of construction and operation, as well as maintenance with simple operational steps; |
|                                |                                 | Open systems are more prone to CO2 diffusion to the atmosphere, evaporative losses of water and poor light utilization by microalgae; |
|                                |                                 | Due to insufficient mixing, oscillations in the culture conditions and higher susceptibility to contaminations, biomass productivities and nutrients removal efficiencies in open systems are lower than those of closed systems. |
|                                |                                 | Tetracycline (2 mg/L, 69%, 16 d)                                                                    |
|                                |                                 | Tetracycline (100 μg/L, 93%, HRT = 4 d)                                                            |
|                                |                                 | COD (669 mg/L, 78%, HRT = 4 d)                                                                     |
|                                |                                 | TN (70 mg/L, 39%, HRT = 4 d)                                                                       |
|                                |                                 | TOC (147 mg/L, 75%, HRT = 4 d)                                                                     |
|                                |                                 | Ciprofloxacin (2 mg/L, 62%, HRT = 7 d)                                                             |
|                                | Closed PBRs                    | Flat plate reactors                                                                                 |
|                                |                                 | In closed systems, culture conditions and growth parameters can be strictly controlled;              |
|                                |                                 | Meanwhile, evaporation and contaminations can be easily avoided;                                    |
|                                |                                 | Due to the high light utilization efficiency, high biomass production can be achieved;              |
|                                |                                 | Closed systems require higher construction costs and show difficulties in large-scale.              |
|                                |                                 | Bubble-column reactors                                                                                |
|                                |                                 | Tubular reactors                                                                                     |
| Immobilized cells              | Immobilized-Microalgae in      | Compared to the suspended cells cultivation systems, immobilized cells are easily to be harvested;  |
|                                | powdered activated carbon        | Immobilization matrix confers cells higher resistance to harsh environments, as a result of which promote the productivities of biomass and pigment, as well as enhance the removal of nutrients and antibiotics; |
|                                |                                 | Immobilizing a microalgae culture into biopolymers require comparatively high costs; thus, restricting their application at large scales. |
|                                |                                 | Sulfamethoxazole (500 μg/L, 99%, 7 d)                                                              |
|                                |                                 | TN (55 mg/L, 98%, 7 d)                                                                              |
|                                |                                 | TP (27 mg/L, 98%, 7 d)                                                                              |
|                                |                                 | COD (1169 mg/L, 72%, 7 d)                                                                           |
|                                |                                 | Immobilized-microalgae in luffa sponge                                                              |
|                                |                                 | Sulfacetamide (4 μg/L, 95%, HRT = 8 d)                                                              |
|                                |                                 | Sulfamethazine (4 μg/L, 93%, HRT = 8 d)                                                             |
|                                |                                 | Sulfamethoxazole (4 μg/L, 82%, HRT = 8 d)                                                          |
| Hybrid systems                 | Microalgae þ CAS               | Chlorella pyrenoidosa þ CAS                                                                          |
|                                |                                 | Compared with CAS treatment, the combined treatment system could achieve high removal efficiency and less second environmental pollution; |
|                                |                                 | A minor change in microalgae: activated sludge ratio could influence the whole performance, including nutrient remediation, antibiotics removal and biomass production; |
|                                |                                 | The HRAP technology can be applied as a tertiary treatment in a conventional WWTPs, reducing the environmental risk of the effluent towards aquatic species. |
|                                |                                 | Cefradine (100 mg/L, 90%, 48 h)                                                                     |
|                                |                                 | Cefalexin (100 mg/L, 95%, 48 h)                                                                     |
|                                |                                 | Ceftazidime (100 mg/L, 90%, 48 h)                                                                   |
|                                |                                 | Cefixime (100 mg/L, 100%, 48 h)                                                                     |
|                                |                                 | Chlorella sp. þ CAS (3:1, wt/wt)                                                                    |
|                                |                                 | TN (200 mg/L, 86%, 5 d)                                                                              |
|                                |                                 | TP (40 mg/L, 79%, 5 d)                                                                              |
|                                |                                 | COD (500 mg/L, 99%, 5 d)                                                                            |
|                                |                                 | UASB þ HRAP                                                                                         |
|                                |                                 | Ofloxacin (909 μg/L, 44%, 30 d)                                                                     |
|                                |                                 | Norfloxacin (1332 μg/L, 82%, 30 d)                                                                  |
|                                |                                 | Clarithromycin (1304 μg/L, 95%, 30 d)                                                               |
|                                |                                 | Sulfamethoxazole (164 μg/L, 38%, 30 d)                                                              |
|                                |                                 | Trimethoprim (159 μg/L, 100%, 30 d)                                                                 |
| Microalgae þ AOPs             | Microalgae þ UV:               | AOPs can be applied as a pretreatment step to improve the biodegradability of wastewater containing recalcitrant compounds; |
|                                |                                 | Microalgae performed high tolerance to antibiotics and exhibited potential in reducing toxicity of the parent compounds and the corresponding by-products after the preceding chemical process, as well as being a promising source for the production of biodiesel; |
|                                |                                 | Compared with the removal capacity of individual microalgal | | Contents                                                   | Application                             | Characteristics                                                                 |
|-----------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (Initial concentration, removal efficiency and culture time) |                                        |                                                                                 |
| Amoxicillin (100 mg/L, 97%, 48 h)3                        |                                        | treatments, a higher removal rate and a shorter time was achieved              |
| Fe3þ: Enrofloxacin (1 mg/L, 78%, 4 h)4                   | Microalgae þ CWs                      | The compatibility of UV wavelength and the microalgal species, as well as H2O/Fe2+ molar ratios needed to be evaluated.2 |
| Ciprofloxacin (10 mg/L, 72%, 4 h)4                        |                                        |                                                                                 |
| NH4-N (25 mg/L, 67.2%, 72 h)1                             | HRAP þ CW:                            | Microalgae could grow in wastewater and increase the concentration of DO via efficient photosynthesis; |
| TN (26 mg/L, 63.5%, 72 h)1                                |                                        | Microalgae debris acted as source of organic matters for denitrification of CW; |
| N-NH3 (28.8 mg/L, 97.8%, 17 d)2                           | HRAP þ VFCW:                          | HRAP-CW hybrid systems effectively promoted the nitrogen removal performance due to rich DO and COD. |
| TP (1.68 mg/L, 61.3%, 17 d)2                              |                                        |                                                                                 |
| COD (345.4 mg/L, 43.2%, 17 d)2                            |                                        |                                                                                 |
| BOD5 (234.5 mg/L, 45.7%, 17 d)2                           |                                        |                                                                                 |
| TN (30 mg/L, 81%, 105 d)3                                 | Shallow algal pond þ VFCW:           |                                                                                 |
| TP (2 mg/L, 44%, 105 d)3                                  |                                        |                                                                                 |
| COD (130 mg/L, 70%, 105 d)3                               |                                        |                                                                                 |
| COD (850 mg/L, 61.5%, 400 h)1                             | Microalgae þ MFCs                     | Microalgal waste could be used as an anolyte of the MFCs: waste treatment and electricity generation; |
| Maximum power density (1.07 W/m2)1                        |                                        | Harmful algal biomass (Microcystis aeruginosa) could also be converted into bioelectricity in MFCs-microalgae, with completely removal of microcystin-LR and high COD removal efficiency. |
| COD (67.5%, 140 h)2                                       | Microcystis aeruginosa þ MFCs:       | substantial coulombic efficiencies (7.6%)2                                    |
| Maximum power density (83 mW/m2)2                         | MFCs:                                 |                                                                                 |
| Sulphamethoxazole (20 mg/L, 85%, 11 h)3                   |                                        |                                                                                 |
| Chloramphenicol (32 mg/L, 96%, 24 h)4                     |                                        |                                                                                 |

Note: HRAP: high rate algal pond; HRT: hydraulic retention times; COD: chemical oxygen demand; TN: total nitrogen; TOC: total organic carbon; PBR: photo-bioreactor; TP: total phosphorus; CAS: conventional activated sludge; UASB: upflow anaerobic sludge blanket; CW: constructed wetland; VFCW: vertical flow constructed wetlands; N-NH3: ammonia nitrogen; BOD5: biochemical oxygen demand; DO: dissolved oxygen; MFCs: microbial fuel cells.

Immobilizations techniques can be categorized as natural (or passive) or artificial (or active) immobilization. Natural immobilization occurs through the innate characteristics of microalgal cells, which attach to a specific surface, and secrete EPS that cause formation of biofilm on solid surfaces. Under natural conditions, microalgae-bacteria consortium presents as biofilms, and release EPS that subsequently protect immobilized cells from surrounding interventions and further promote external biodegradation of micropollutants. Previous studies have shown that artificial immobilization can be achieved by adsorption, confinement in liquid–liquid emulsions, capturing with semi-permeable membranes, affinity immobilization, covalent coupling or entrapment within polymers, among which adsorption and entrapment within polymers matrices represent the most common techniques. However, high costs associated with immobilization matrices have restricted their large scale application. Summarily, conventional microalgae-based treatment approaches are environmentally sustainable techniques, yet further studies are highly required to improve their performance and expand application.

As it has been described in above section, conventional microalgae-based treatment systems are widely applied to the treatment of wastewater. However, they can not effectively remove some antibiotics due to their compound- and process-specific characteristics, which also exhibit toxic effects on microalgae. To overcome the biorecalcitrant, more efficient and specific treatments are need to be developed. The hybrid technique, comprising a combination of two or more treatment processes, has emerged as a promising approach for micropollutants removal in wastewater treatment. In this section, four hybrid techniques based on microalgal treatment are discussed. Comparisons between innovational hybrid techniques with conventional microalgae-based treatment approaches are summarized in Table 3, focusing on their advantages and limitations.

The conventional activated sludge process has been employed for treatment of municipal wastewater for more than 100 years. However, the technique has been critisized for its high energy consumption and low removal efficiencies of micropollutants. Deriving from the cooperative interactions between microalgae and bacteria, microalgae-bacteria consortium show excellent performance on removal of nutrients, heavy metals and micropollutants. The hybrid microalgae-activated sludge system is economically suitable for wastewater treatment, due to its lower energy demands, cost-effectiveness and potential resource recovery. Guo and Chen initially employed a hybrid microalgae-activated sludge system to investigate the removal of cephalosporins, achieving high removal efficiency up to 97.91%. Ji et al. investigated the removal capacity and the working mechanisms of a novel microalgae-bacteria granular sludge system for municipal wastewater treatment. Results showed that the new system was efficient in wastewater treatment through microalgal and bacterial assimilations, which were further confirmed by the analysis of reaction stoichiometry, microbial community and functional genes. Moreover, miscellaneous means were demonstrated to participate in the removal of micropollutants, ranging from physical adsorption, covalent bonding, bioaccumulation to biodegradation. Furthermore, many factors influence the removal efficiency of micropollutants in the hybrid microalgae-activated sludge system, such as the microalgae-activated sludge inoculum ratio (wt/wt), cultivation conditions, the concentration and physicochemical properties of pollutants.

However, current understanding for the underlying mechanisms of micropollutants removal is still insufficient, due to the dynamic multi-faceted and complexity of the microalgae-bacteria interactions in the system. With the development of metagenomics and other omics methodologies, great efforts will be conducted to unravel a deeper understanding of the microalgae-bacteria interactions, as well as related pathways that regulate the sociobiological behavior and ecological functioning of the consortium. Additionally, high-throughput sequencing technology is an “unbiased” cloning method, which gives a new insight to identify the phycosphere bacterial diversity and the functional aspects of bacterial communities. Furthermore, genetic modification can help select appropriate microalgal and bacterial strains to construct a hybrid microalgae-activated sludge system, with a broad-spectrum applicability, optimal pollutants removal efficiencies, efficient biomass productivity, high yields of value-added by-products and biofuel at relatively lower costs.

### Hybrid of microalgae-based treatments and advanced oxidation processes
AOPs, including UV, H2O2, ozone, and Fenton reagents, have been extensively applied in wastewater treatment systems, achieving high removal efficiencies and rapid removal rates. However, high operational and maintenance costs needed in large-scale applications, as well as incomplete mineralization of pollutants during AOPs which might generate more toxicity byproducts, cannot be ignored. For example, Du et al. found that although AOPs allowed 73.07% of cefradine to be removed within 0.237 h by UV treatment, toxicity of its byproducts was 1.04 times higher than that of parent compound. To ensure efficient and economical treatment, studies have proposed combining AOPs with microalgal treatment, an alternative approach which has been demonstrated to be efficacy in removal of antibiotics. Previous study reported that a higher removal efficiency of cefradine and a lower toxicity of the effluent was obtained synchronously by a hybrid UV-microalgae treatment system. Furthermore, an integrated view of intimate coupling UV irradiation and microalgal treatment on the removal of antibiotics has been reported. Yang et al. evaluated the contribution of UV and microalgae to the removal of cefradine and amoxicillin under a hybrid UV-microalgae system, and found that microalgae played a dominant role in the treatment. Specifically, Scenedesmus obliquus, combined with UV-irradiation at 365 nm, exhibited excellent efficiency (99.84%) in removing cefradine and amoxicillin within 24 h. In addition, Li et al. found that removal of cefradine by Chlorella pyrenoidosa in combination with H2O2/Fe(II)-based Fenton reactions increased from 7.4% to over 90%, relative to individual microalgal treatment. Antibiotics can also be removed by AOPs-induced indirect photodegradation. For instance, Ge and Deng reported efficient removal of enrofloxacin and ciprofloxacin hydrochloride by applying the Fe(III)-microalgae system. However, AOPs in combination with microalgal treatment, have adverse effects on microalgae, including mutation induced by UV irradiation, and death due to high concentrations of H2O2 or Fe(II). Thus, more research efforts should focus on identifying special conditions that are suitable for each microalgal treatment.

### Hybrid of microalgae-based treatments and constructed wetlands
Constructed wetlands (CWs) have also been extensively applied in treatment of wastewaters generated from agriculture, industry and municipality. These systems have exhibited excellent performance in the removal of various micropollutants, including antibiotics and ARGs. Compared to traditional treatment technology, CWs are a more sustainable technology due to their low cost of construction, operation and maintenance requirements. But, they could also show a long retention time and low efficiency under low temperature conditions. Over the past years, CWs-microalgae systems have effectively improved treatment of wastewater, and consequently applied as pre or post-treatment process. Silveira et al. applied an integrated system, comprising microalgae and vertical flow constructed wetlands, for the treatment of urban wastewater produced at a university campus, and achieved excellent removal of organic loads with low toxic effects. On the other hand, Zhao et al. observed that combining microalgal pond with vertical flow CWs guaranteed excellent removal efficiency of contaminants (total phosphorus (TP) 71.9%, total nitrogen (TN) 81.0% and chemical oxygen demand (COD) 70%) even at low temperatures. Similar results were reported by Ding et al., suggesting that the higher nitrogen removal might be due to the enrichment of dissolved oxygen (DO) and COD in CWs-microalgae system. Generally, nitrification process is the rate-limiting step in CWs due to the low oxygen availability. However, DO generated from photosynthesis by microalgae may compensate for those limitations in CWs, thereby improving elimination of contaminants in CWs-microalgae systems. Additionally, microbial carbon source, that accumulate from dead microalgae and microalgal debris, might serve as the organic substrate for plants in the CWs, and help improve removal performances of N and P. Therefore, the integration of microalgal treatment into CWs is a novel technology, which has a great potential in large scale application for wastewater treatment.

### Hybrid of microalgae-based treatments and microbial fuel cells
As a subclass of bioelectrochemical systems, microbial fuel cells (MFCs) have been developed and extended as a novel approach for sustainable wastewater treatment, energy harvesting and resource recovery. Specifically, MFCs employ electrochemically active microorganisms to convert chemical energy into electrical energy, which contain two reverse polar electrodes as the anode pole and cathode pole. Based on the activities of microorganisms, organic substrates are oxidized to produce CO2, protons and electrons in the anode pole. Then electrons are transferred through an external circuit to the cathode pole, whilst the protons migrate from anode to cathode through electrolyte (salt bridge or membrane separators). Finally, a terminal electron acceptor, such as, oxygen, organic pollutants or heavy metals, is reduced in the cathode pole after accepting electrons and protons. Previous studies have demonstrated that MFCs can efficiently remove organic matters within a reasonable hydraulic retention time, although they are restricted to the removal of nutrients due to anaerobic condition in the anodic pole. To overcome these challenges, researchers have introduced microalgae at either the anodic or the cathodic compartments of MFCs to act as substrates for oxidation reactions under anaerobic conditions or to generate oxygen for using as electron acceptors, respectively. To date, a variety of microalgae have been reported to integrate with MFCs for wastewater treatment, mainly including the genera Chlorella, Scenedesmus, Microcystis and Chlamydomonas. A study by Ndayisenga et al. found that the power generation and COD removal capability of MFCs fed with Chlorella regularis (MFCs-Algae) were comparable to those of a commercial acetate-fed MFCs, indicating that microalgae were suitable substrates in MFCs systems. Similar results were reported by Ali et al., showed that harmful algal biomass could also be utilized in MFCs for sustainable wastewater management and algal blooms mitigation. Moreover, integrated system comprising MFCs with Microcystis aeruginosa was found to completely eliminate microcystin-LR, with comparable COD removal efficiency (67.5 ± 1.0%) and higher power density (83 mW/m2), relative to MFCs-Acetate. An immobilized microalgae-based photoautotrophic MFCs, developed for the first time to simultaneously eliminate nutrients and recover bioenergy from domestic wastewater, exhibited excellent removal efficiencies. Specifically, this system eliminated 93.2% of sCOD, 95.9% of NH+-N, 95.1% of TN, and 82.7% of PO4^3-P, and has a maximum power density of 466.9 mW/m2. Additionally, mixed cultures can also be used to integrate with MFCs for wastewater treatment and bioelectricity production. The microalgae-bacteria MFCs has emerged as an efficient approach for suppressing antibiotic contaminants, in which microbial metabolism couples with electrochemical redox reactions for efficient antibiotics removal. Sun et al. employed a novel microalgae-bacteria MFCs system to simultaneously degrade anodic florfenicol, eliminate cathodic nitrogen and generate bioelectricity. Moreover, some researchers believe that MFCs system can also contribute to the removal of ARB and ARGs. Therefore, a combination of MFCs technology with microalgae-based process can improve overall performance, achieve sustainable wastewater treatment (micropollutants and nutrients removal) coupled with low greenhouse gases emission and reduced sludge production. In addition, this approach can directly convert electrical energy to chemical energy, and produce biofuels or valuable recovered materials from microalgal biomass. Taken together, these results suggest that the hybrid MFCs–microalgae process is a novel alternative for wastewater treatment, which also guarantees sustainable recovery of renewable energy and biological products.

5. Potential for genetic engineering in improving microalgae-based antibiotics bioremediation

Generally, microalgae exhibit species-specific preference and tolerance to surrounding environments, as well as specific performance for the biodegradation of different antibiotics. In this context, prospecting for suitable microbial strains is a crucial first step towards constructing a stable microalgae-based system for continuous and efficient removal of pollutants from wastewater, as well as a vital factor for the sustainable production of biofuels. High-throughput sequencing technique provides insight to analysis of the microbial community structure, functions and dynamics in the microalgae-based system, as well as isolation of microbes with capacity for efficient biodegradation of micropollutants. The biodegradation capacity of chloramphenicol by enriched bacterial consortium was investigated, and results indicated that the core bacterial genera including Sphingomonas, Cupriavidus, Burkholderia, Chryseobacterium, and Pigmentiphaga. Moreover, chloramphenicol was found to be completely removed by the isolated Sphingomonas sp. CL5.1 in 48 h with a mineralization rate of 50.4%. Besides, genetic engineering has also been used to exploit engineered microbial strains or consortium, aiming at improving the specific metabolic activities of microbes or enriching microbes with specific functionality. Compared with wild-type bacteria, hermotolerant facultative anaerobes modified via genetic engineering showed significantly improved efficient degradation capacity on various nitroalkanes. Microalgal clones, engineered with functional enzyme genes such as laccase enzyme, were shown to improve oxidoreductases stability, guaranteeing effective bioremediation of pollutants. Laccases are extracellular oxidoreductases that are abundant in bacteria and plants. Functionally, they can catalyze a broad variety of reactions due to their low-substrate specificity, especially one-electron oxidation of monophenols, diphenols, and polyphenols as well as aromatic amines, diamines, among others. In addition to being able of introducing functional genes into microalgal genome, targeted genome editing is becoming increasingly popular in the modification of microalgal strains. CRISPR-based gene targeting technology was successfully applied in Euglena gracilis, achieving a glucan synthase-like 2 gene responsible for paramylon synthesis. Although microbes modified by genetic engineering show highly biodegradation capacity of micropollutants in lab-scale reactors, their application in WWTPs remains controversial. The societal concerns towards gene modification strategies are related to the unforeseeable effects of microbes with new functions in an open environment. Additionally, the enhanced transfer of modified genes may also accelerate the mobilization of ARGs. Therefore, further efforts should be focused on the application of genetic engineering technology in on-site reactors at WWTPs, and on risk assessment of gene modification such as the transfer of ARGs, to broaden their application in wastewater bioremediation.

6. Concluding remarks and perspectives

The overview of microalgal bioremediation suggests a promising outlook for the application of microalgae-based technology in wastewater treatment. For antibiotics, bioadsorption, bioaccumulation, and biodegradation are demonstrated to be the three major removal mechanisms mediated by microalgae. Additionally, there is a strong evidence that EPS plays an important role in the bioadsorption and extracellular biodegradation of antibiotics. However, the role of EPS involved in the removal of antibiotics and the underlying mechanisms associated with the complex interactions between EPS and antibiotics remain unclear. Even though the biodegradation mechanisms of antibiotics have been widely investigated by previous studies, which are not fully understood, especially at the molecular level. Omics technologies, such as transcriptomics, genomics, proteomics, and metabolomics, are shedding lights on unraveling functional genes associated with metabolic pathways of antibiotics, identifying the potential proteins that mediate electron transport, as well as enzymes that catalyze metabolic reactions of antibiotics. Moreover, combination of multi-omics technologies has facilitated further comprehensive understanding of the underlying mechanisms of micropollutants biodegradation. Even though omics technologies have emerged as promising molecular tools, the application of uni- or multi-omics approaches in wastewater bioremediation mechanisms is still in its infancy and critical overview of these technologies used to date is limited. Microalgae are emerging as highly attractive candidates for bioremediation especially in wastewater treatment, but they exhibit limited biodegradation capacity of some recalcitrant antibiotics. Several novel approaches are recommended in this review to improve the removal efficiency of recalcitrant antibiotics, including acclimation, co-metabolism and microbial consortium. Microalgae acclimated under harsh or limiting conditions show higher tolerance and biodegradation. capacity than wild-type microalgal species. However, little is known about the ability of microalgal species response to various environmental stresses, and in-depth studies are needed to reveal the role of the stress conditions in improving removal of organic contaminants. Previous studies have shown that co-metabolism is an effective strategy for promoting microalgae-mediated biodegradation of antibiotics, and the type and concentration of carbon sources play the most critical role in the co-metabolic of antibiotics. To date, most studies focus on screening an appropriate carbon source and optimizing its concentration, while the response mechanisms of microalgae to carbon source is not available. Besides, microalgal consortium applied for wastewater treatment has been demonstrated to be cost-effective and environment-friendly. The interactions established in consortium are usually elucidated from biological and physical perspectives, limited information is known about their inner mechanisms at the molecular and biochemical levels. It is essential to completely understand the complex and dynamic interactions involved in consortium, which constitutes a crucial first step towards the construction of engineered consortium for their efficient application in wastewater treatment and bio-products recovery. However, the application of genetic engineering technology in wastewater bioremediation remains need more attention, especially with respect to the risk assessment of gene modification such as the transfer of ARGs.

On the other hand, four hybrid techniques based on microalgal treatment are recommended in this review, which are proved to be a promising approach for micropollutants removal in wastewater treatment. However, most of hybrid systems and above mentioned novel approaches are performed in laboratory scale units and still at initial stages of development. There are still challenges and critical problems to expand their application in full-scale WWTPs with regards to technical, environmental-friendly and economically competitiveness. Previous studies have mainly focused on improving efficiency of microalgae-mediated removal of antibiotics, while knowledge on the consequent fate of ARGs and ARB in wastewater remains limited. Besides, although a handful studies have investigated toxicity of effluents after conventional wastewater treatments, similar investigations on hybrid systems are unavailable. Therefore, future studies should seek to estimate the actual performance of hybrid systems, with regards to efficiency of removal of ARGs and ARB in addition to targeted antibiotics, as well as the toxicity of effluents. Overall, given the diversity of antibiotics pollutants and the complexity of realistic pollutant environments, several challenges with respect to the improvement of the removal capacity, revelation of inner molecular mechanisms, development and application of hybrid systems, removal of ARGs and ARB, as well as toxicity investigation of effluents remain to be addressed and need more attention.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China, the National Key Research and Development Program of China, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Chemical Pollution and Environmental Safety, and Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province. Dudley, S., Sun, C.L., Jiang, J., Gan, J., 2018. Metabolism of sulfamethoxazole in Arabidopsis thaliana cells and cucumber seedlings. Environ. Pollut. 242, 1748–1757
Eroglu, E., Smith, S.M., Raston, C.L., 2015. Application of various immobilization techniques for algal bioprocesses. In: Moheimani, N.R., McHenry, M.P., de Boer, K., Bahri, P.A. (Eds.), Biomass and biofuels from microalgae. Springer International Publishing Switzerland: Biofuel and Biorefinery Technologies, pp. 19–44
Ferrando, L., Matamoros, V., 2020. Attenuation of nitrates, antibiotics and pesticides from groundwater using immobilised microalgae-based systems. Sci. Total Environ. 703, 134740
Fomina, M., Gadd, G.M., 2014. Biosorption: current perspectives on concept, definition and application. Bioresour. Technol. 160, 3–14
Fuentes, J., Garbayo, I., Cuaresma, M., Montero, Z., González-del-Valle, M., Vílchez, C., 2016. Impact of microalgae-bacteria interactions on the production of algal biomass and associated compounds. Mar. Drugs 14, 100
Ge, L.Y., Deng, H.H., 2015. Degradation of two fluoroquinolone antibiotics photoinduced by Fe(III)-microalgae suspension in an aqueous solution. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 14, 693–699
Gojkovic, Z., Lindberg, R.H., Tysklind, M., Funk, C., 2019. Northern green algae have the capacity to remove active pharmaceutical ingredients. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 170, 644–656
Gonçalves, A.L., Pires, J.C.M., Simões, M., 2017. A review on the use of microalgal consortia for wastewater treatment. Algal Res. 24, 403–415
González-Pleiter, M., Gonzalo, S., Rodea-Palomares, I., Leganés, F., Rosal, R., Boltes, K., Marco, E., Fernández-Piñas, F., 2013. Toxicity of five antibiotics and their mixtures towards photosynthetic aquatic organisms: Implications for environmental risk assessment. Water Res. 47, 2050–2064
Grandclement, C., Seyssiecq, I., Piram, A., Wong-Wah-Chung, P., Vanot, G., Tiliacos, N., Roche, N., Doumenq, P., 2017. From the conventional biological wastewater treatment to hybrid processes, the evaluation of organic micropollutant removal: A review. Water Res. 111, 297–317
Gross, E.M., 2003. Allelopathy of aquatic autotrophs. Crit. Rev. Plant Sci. 22, 313–339
Guo, R.X., Chen, J.Q., 2015. Application of alga-activated sludge combined system (AASCS) as a novel treatment to remove cephalosporins. Chem. Eng. J. 260, 550–556
Guo, W.Q., Zheng, H.S., Li, S., Du, J.S., Feng, X.C., Yin, R.L., Wu, Q.L., Ren, N.Q., Chang, J.S., 2016. Removal of cephalosporin antibiotics 7-ACA from wastewater during the cultivation of lipid-accumulating microalgae. Bioresour. Technol. 221, 284–290
Hansda, A., Kumar, V., Anshumali, 2016. A comparative review towards potential of microbial cells for heavy metal removal with emphasis on biosorption and bioaccumulation. World J. Microb. Biot. 32, 170
Hassan, M., Zhu, G.C., Lu, Y.Z., AL-Falahi, A.H., Lu, Y., Huang, S., Wan, Z.R., 2021. Removal of antibiotics from wastewater and its problematic effects on microbial communities by bioelectrochemical technology: Current knowledge and future perspectives. Environ. Eng. Res. 26
He, L.Y., Ying, G.G., Liu, Y.S., Su, H.C., Chen, J., Liu, S.S., Zhao, J.L., 2016. Discharge of swine wastes risks water quality and food safety: Antibiotics and antibiotic resistance genes from swine sources to the receiving environments. Environ. Int. 92–93, 210–219
Hena, S., Gutierrez, L., Croué, J.P., 2021. Removal of pharmaceutical and personal care products (PPCPs) from wastewater using microalgae: A review. J. Hazard. Mater. 403, 124041
Hena, S., Gutierrez, L., Croué, J.P., 2020. Removal of metronidazole from aqueous media by C. vulgaris. J. Hazard. Mater. 384, 121400
Hom-Diaz, A., Norvill, Z.N., Blanquez, P., Vicent, T., Guieysse, B., 2017. Ciprofloxacin removal during secondary domestic wastewater treatment in high rate algal ponds. Chemosphere 180, 33–41
Huang, F.Y., An, Z.Y., Moran, M.J., Liu, F., 2020. Recognition of typical antibiotic residues in environmental media related to groundwater in China (2009–2019). J. Hazard. Mater. 399, 122813
Ishika, T., Moheimani, N.R., Bahri, P.A., 2017. Sustainable saline microalgae co-cultivation for biofuel production: A critical review. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 78, 356–368
Ji, B., Zhang, M., Gu, J., Ma, Y.Q., Liu, Y., 2020. A self-sustaining synergetic microalgal-bacterial granular sludge process towards energy-efficient and environmentally sustainable municipal wastewater treatment. Water Res. 179, 115884
Khatiwada, B., Sunna, A., Nevalainen, H., 2020. Molecular tools and applications of Euglena gracilis: From biorefineries to bioremediation. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 117, 3952–3967
Kiki, C., Rashid, A., Wang, Y.W., Li, Y., Zeng, Q.T., Yu, C.P., Sun, Q., 2020. Dissipation of antibiotics by microalgae: Kinetics, identification of transformation products and pathways. J. Hazard. Mater. 387, 121985
Klein, E.Y., Van Boeckel, T.P., Martinez, E.M., Pant, S., Gandra, S., Levin, S.A., Goossens, H., Laxminarayan, R., 2018. Global increase and geographic convergence in antibiotic consumption between 2000 and 2015. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 115, E3463–E3470
Kumar, M., Jaiswal, S., Sodhi, K.K., Shree, P., Singh, D.K., Agrawal, P.K., Shukla, P., 2019. Antibiotics bioremediation: Perspectives on its ecotoxicity and resistance. Environ. Int. 124, 448–461
Kumar, M.S., Kabra, A.N., Min, B., El-Dalatony, M.M., Xiong, J., Thajuddin, N., Lee, D.S., Jeon, B.H., 2016. Insecticides induced biochemical changes in freshwater microalga Chlamydomonas mexicana. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 23, 1091–1099
Kummerer, K., 2009. Antibiotics in the aquatic environment - a review - part I. Chemosphere 75, 417–434

Kurade, M.B., Kim, J.R., Govindwar, S.P., Jeon, B.H., 2016. Insights into microalgae mediated biodegradation of diazinon by Chlorella vulgaris: Microalgal tolerance to xenobiotic pollutants and metabolism. Algal Res. 20, 126–134
Lee, Y.J., Lei, Z.F., 2019. Microalgal-bacterial aggregates for wastewater treatment: A mini-review. Bioresour. Technol. Rep. 8, 100199
Leng, L.J., Wei, L., Xiong, Q., Xu, S.Y., Li, W.T., Lv, S., Lu, Q., Wan, L.P., Wen, Z.Y., Zhou, W.G., 2020. Use of microalgae based technology for the removal of antibiotics from wastewater: A review. Chemosphere 238, 124680
Li, H.T., Pan, Y., Wang, Z.Z., Chen, S., Guo, R.X., Chen, J.Q., 2015. An algal process treatment combined with the Fenton reaction for high concentrations of amoxicillin and cefradine. RSC Adv. 5, 100775–100782
Li, X., Wu, S.H., Yang, C.P., Zeng, G.M., 2020. Microalgal and duckweed based constructed wetlands for swine wastewater treatment: A review. Bioresour. Technol. 318, 123858
Liang, B., Cheng, H.Y., Kong, D.Y., Gao, S.H., Sun, F., Cui, D., Kong, F.Y., Zhou, A.J., Liu, W.Z., Ren, N.Q., Wu, W.M., Wang, A.J., Lee, D.J., 2013. Accelerated reduction of chlorinated nitroaromatic antibiotic chloramphenicol by biocathode. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 5353–5361
Liang, C.Z., Zhang, L., Nord, N.B., Carvalho, P.N., Bester, K., 2019. Dose-dependent effects of acetate on the biodegradation of pharmaceuticals in moving bed biofilm reactors. Water Res. 159, 302–312
Liao, X.B., Li, B.X., Zou, R.S., Xie, S.G., Yuan, B.L., 2016. Antibiotic sulfanilamide biodegradation by acclimated microbial populations. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 100, 2439–2447
Liu, J.Z., Wu, Y.H., Wu, C.X., Muylaert, K., Vyverman, W., Yu, H.Q., Munoz, R., Rittmann, B., 2017. Advanced nutrient removal from surface water by a consortium of attached microalgae and bacteria: A review. Bioresour. Technol. 241, 1127–1137
Liu, X.H., Guo, X.C., Liu, Y., Lu, S.Y., Xi, B.D., Zhang, J., Wang, Z., Bi, B., 2019. A review on removing antibiotics and antibiotic resistance genes from wastewater by constructed wetlands: Performance and microbial response. Environ. Pollut. 254, 112996
Liu, Y., Wang, F., Chen, X., Zhang, J., Gao, B.Y., 2015. Cellular responses and biodegradation of amoxicillin in Microcystis aeruginosa at different nitrogen levels. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 111, 138–145
Matamoros, V., Uggetti, E., García, J., Bayona, J.M., 2016. Assessment of the mechanisms involved in the removal of emerging contaminants by microalgae from wastewater: a laboratory scale study. J. Hazard. Mater. 301, 197–205
Mendes, L.B.B., Vermelho, A.B., 2013. Allelopathy as a potential strategy to improve microalgae cultivation. Biotechnol. Biofuels 6, 152–165
Michael, I., Rizzo, L., McArdell, C.S., Manaia, C.M., Merlin, C., Schwartz, T., Dagot, C., Fatta-Kassinos, D., 2013. Urban wastewater treatment plants as hotspots for the release of antibiotics in the environment: A review. Water Res. 47, 957–995
Mishra, A., Medhi, K., Malaviya, P., Thakur, I.S., 2019. Omics approaches for microalgal applications: Prospects and challenges. Bioresour. Technol. 291, 121890
Moradian, J.M., Fang, Z., Yong, Y.C., 2021. Recent advances on biomass-fueled microbial fuel cell. Bioresour. Bioprocess. 8
More, T.T., Yadav, J.S., Yan, S., Tyagi, R.D., Surampalli, R.Y., 2014. Extracellular polymeric substances of bacteria and their potential environmental applications. J. Environ. Manage. 144, 1–25
Nagendranatha Reddy, C., Nguyen, H.T.H., Noori, M.T., Min, B., 2019. Potential applications of algae in the cathode of microbial fuel cells for enhanced electricity generation with simultaneous nutrient removal and algae biorefinery: Current status and future perspectives. Bioresour. Technol. 292, 122010
Nakajima, N., Teramoto, T., Kasai, F., Sano, T., Tamaoki, M., Aono, M., Kubo, A., Kamada, H., Azumi, Y., Saji, H., 2007. Glycosylation of bisphenol A by freshwater microalgae. Chemosphere 69, 934–941
Nautiyal, P., Subramanian, K.A., Dastidar, M.G., 2017. Experimental investigation on adsorption properties of biochar derived from algae biomass residue of biodiesel production. Environ. Process. 4, 179–193
Ndayisenga, F., Yu, Z.S., Yu, Y., Lay, C.H., Zhou, D.D., 2018. Bioelectricity generation using microalgal biomass as electron donor in a bio-anode microbial fuel cell. Bioresour. Technol. 270, 286–293
Nguyen, H.T., Yoon, Y., Ngo, H.H., Jang, A., 2020a. The application of microalgae in removing organic micropollutants in wastewater. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 1–34
Nguyen, H.T.H., Min, B., 2020. Using multiple carbon brush cathode in a novel tubular photosynthetic microbial fuel cell for enhancing bioenergy generation and advanced wastewater treatment. Bioresour. Technol. 316, 123928
Nguyen, T.T.D., Nguyen, T.T., An Binh, Q., Bui, X.T., Ngo, H.H., Vo, H.N.P., Andrew Lin, K.Y., Vo, T.D., Guo, W.S., Lin, C., Breider, F., 2020b. Co-culture of microalgae-activated sludge for wastewater treatment and biomass production: Exploring their role under different inoculation ratios. Bioresour. Technol. 314, 123754
Nguyen, L.N., Commault, A.S., Kahlke, T., Ralph, P.J., Semblante, G.U., Johir, M.A.H., Nghiem, L.D., 2020c. Genome sequencing as a new window into the microbial community of membrane bioreactors - A critical review. Sci. Total. Environ. 704, 135279
Nielsen, P.H., Jahn, A., 1999. Extraction of EPS. In: Wingender, J., Neu, T.R., Flemming, H.C. (Eds.), Microbial Extracellular Polymeric Substances. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 49–72
Nomura, T., Inoue, K., Uehara-Yamaguchi, Y., Yamada, K., Iwata, O., Suzuki, K., Mochida, K., 2019. Highly efficient transgene-free targeted mutagenesis and single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotidemediated precise knock-in in the industrial microalga Euglena gracilis using Cas9 ribonucleoproteins. Plant Biotechnol. J. 17, 2032–2034
Norvill, Z.N., Shilton, A., Guieysse, B., 2016. Emerging contaminant degradation and removal in algal wastewater treatment ponds: Identifying the research gaps. J. Hazard. Mater. 313, 291–309 Norvill, Z.N., Toledo-Cervantes, A., Blanco, S., Shilton, A., Guieysse, B., Munoz, R., 2017. Photodegradation and sorption govern tetracycline removal during wastewater treatment in algal ponds. Bioresour. Technol. 232, 35–43.

Oberoi, A.S., Jia, Y., Zhang, H.Q., Khanal, S.K., Lu, H., 2019. Insights into the fate and removal of antibiotics in engineered biological treatment systems: A critical review. Environ. Sci. Technol. 53, 7234–7264.

Osundeko, O., Dean, A.P., Davies, H., Pittman, J.K., 2014. Acclimation of microalgae to wastewater environments involves increased oxidative stress tolerance activity. Plant Cell Physiol. 55, 1848–1857.

Patel, A.K., Huang, E.L., Low-Decarie, E., Lefsrud, M.G., 2015. Comparative shotgun proteomic analysis of wastewater-cultured microalgae: Nitrogen sensing and carbon fixation for growth and nutrient removal in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. J. Proteome Res. 14, 3051–3067.

Perera, I.A., Abinandan, S., Subashchandrabose, S.R., Venkateswarlu, K., Naidu, R., Megharaj, M., 2019. Advances in the technologies for studying consortia of bacteria and cyanobacteria/microalgae in wastewaters. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 39, 709–731.

Pflugmacher, S., Schroder, P., Sandermann, H., 2000. Taxonomic distribution of plant glutathione S-transferases acting on xenobiotics. Phytochemistry 54, 267–273.

Pflugmacher, S., Wiencke, C., Sandermann, H., 1999. Activity of phase I and phase II detoxication enzymes in Antarctic and Arctic macroalgae. Mar. Environ. Res. 48, 23–36.

Qiao, M., Ying, G.G., Singer, A.C., Zhu, Y.G., 2018. Review of antibiotic resistance in China and its environment. Environ. Int. 110, 160–172.

Quijano, G., Arcila, J.S., Buitron, G., 2017. Microalgal-bacterial aggregates: Applications and perspectives for wastewater treatment. Biotechnol. Adv. 35, 772–781.

Rios Miguel, A.B., Jetten, M.S.M., Welte, C.U., 2020. The role of mobile genetic elements in organic micropollutant degradation during biological wastewater treatment. Water Res. X 9, 100065.

Saba, B., Christy, A.D., Yu, Z.T., Co, A.C., 2017. Sustainable power generation from bacterio-algal microbial fuel cells (MFCs): An overview. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 73, 75–84.

Santaeufemia, S., Torres, E., Mera, R., Abalde, J., 2016. Bioremediation of oxytetracycline in seawater by living and dead biomass of the microalga Phaeodactylum tricornutum. J. Hazard. Mater. 320, 315–325.

Sheng, G.P., Yu, H.Q., Li, X.Y., 2010. Extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) of microbial aggregates in biological wastewater treatment systems: A review. Biotechnol. Adv. 28, 882–894.

Shukla, M., Kumar, S., 2018. Algal growth in photosynthetic algal microbial fuel cell and its subsequent utilization for biofuels. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 82, 402–414.

Silveira, E.O., Lutterbeck, C.A., Machado, E.L., Rodrigues, L.R., Rieger, A., Beckenkamp, F., Lobo, E.A., 2020. Biomonitoring of urban wastewaters treated by an integrated system combining microalgae and constructed wetlands. Sci. Total Environ. 705, 135864.

Song, C.F., Wei, Y.L., Qiu, Y.T., Qi, Y., Li, Y., Kitamura, Y., 2019. Biodegradability and mechanism of florfenicol via Chlorella sp. UTEX1602 and L38: Experimental study. Bioresour. Technol. 272, 529–534.

Stravs, M.A., Pomati, F., Hollender, J., 2017. Exploring micropollutant biotransformation in three freshwater phytoplankton species. Environ. Sci. Process. Impacts 19, 822–832.

Su, H.C., Liu, Y.S., Pan, C.G., Chen, J., He, L.Y., Ying, G.G., 2018. Persistence of antibiotic resistance genes and bacterial community changes in drinking water treatment system: From drinking water source to tap water. Sci. Total Environ. 616–617, 453–461.

Subashchandrabose, S.R., Ramakrishnan, B., Megharaj, M., Venkateswarlu, K., Naidu, R., 2013. Mixotrophic cyanobacteria and microalgae as distinctive biological agents for organic pollutant degradation. Environ. Int. 51, 59–72.

Subhash, G.V., Chandra, R., Mohan, S.V., 2013. Microalgae mediated bio-electrocatalytic fuel cell facilitates bioelectricity generation through oxygenic photomixotrophic mechanism. Bioresour. Technol. 136, 644–653.

Sun, J., Li, N., Yang, P., Zhang, Y.P., Yuan, Y., Lu, X.W., Zhang, H.G., 2020. Simultaneous antibiotic degradation, nitrogen removal and power generation in a microalgae-bacteria powered biofuel cell designed for aquaculture wastewater treatment and energy recovery. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 45, 10871–10881.

Sun, M., Lin, H., Guo, W., Zhao, F.Z., Li, J., 2017. Bioaccumulation and biodegradation of sulfamethazine in Chlorella pyrenoidosa. J. Ocean U. China 16, 1167–1174.

Sutherland, D.L., Ralph, P.J., 2019. Microalgal bioremediation of emerging contaminants - Opportunities and challenges. Water Res. 164, 114921.

Tadkaew, N., Hai, F.I., McDonald, J.A., Khan, S.J., Nghiem, L.D., 2011. Removal of trace organics by MBR treatment: The role of molecular properties. Water Res. 45, 2439–2451.

Tan, X.F., Liu, Y.G., Zeng, G.M., Wang, X., Hu, X.J., Gu, Y.L., Yang, Z.Z., 2015. Application of biochar for the removal of pollutants from aqueous solutions. Chemosphere 125, 70–85.

Tang, J.P., Wang, S., Tai, Y.P., Tam, N.F., Su, L.H., Shi, Y.M., Luo, B., Tao, R., Yang, Y., Zhang, X.M., 2020. Evaluation of factors influencing annual occurrence, bioaccumulation, and biomagnification of antibiotics in planktonic food webs of a large subtropical river in South China. Water Res. 170, 115302.

Tiwari, B., Sellamuthu, B., Ouarda, Y., Drogui, P., Tyagi, R.D., Buelna, G., 2017. Review on fate and mechanism of removal of pharmaceutical pollutants from wastewater using biological approach. Bioresour. Technol. 224, 1–12.

Torres, M.A., Barros, M.P., Campos, S.C., Pinto, E., Rajamani, S., Sayre, R.T., Colepicolo, P., 2008. Biochemical biomarkers in algae and marine pollution: A review. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 71, 1–15.

Tran, N.H., Chen, H.J., Reinhard, M., Mao, F.J., Gin, K.Y., 2016. Occurrence and removal of multiple classes of antibiotics and antimicrobial agents in biological wastewater treatment processes. Water Res. 104, 461–472.

Tran, N.H., Reinhard, M., Gin, K.Y.H., 2018. Occurrence and fate of emerging contaminants in municipal wastewater treatment plants from different geographical regions - a review. Water Res. 133, 182–207.

Tran, N.H., Urase, T., Ngo, H.H., Hu, J.Y., Ong, S.L., 2013. Insight into metabolic and cometabolic activities of autotrophic and heterotrophic microorganisms in the biodegradation of emerging trace organic contaminants. Bioresour. Technol. 146, 721–731.

Trump, B.D., Siharulidze, G., Cummings, C.L. Synthetic biology and risk regulation: The case of singapore. In: Trump, B.D., Cummings, C.L., Kuzma, J., Linkov, I. (Eds.), Synthetic Biology 2020: Frontiers in Risk Analysis and Governance. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 297–312.

Ufarte, L., Laville, E., Duquesne, S., Potocki-Veronese, G., 2015. Metagenomics for the discovery of pollutant degrading enzymes. Biotechnol. Adv. 33, 1845–1854.

Van Boeckel, T.P., Brower, C., Gilbert, M., Grenfell, B.T., Levin, S.A., Robinson, T.P., Teillant, A., Laxminarayan, R., 2015. Global trends in antimicrobial use in food animals. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112, 5649–5654.

Villar-Navarro, E., Baena-Nogueras, R.M., Paniw, M., Perales, J.A., Lara-Martin, P.A., 2018. Removal of pharmaceuticals in urban wastewater: High rate algae pond (HRAP) based technologies as an alternative to activated sludge based processes. Water Res. 139, 19–29.

Vo, H.N.P., Ngo, H.H., Guo, W.S., Liu, Y.W., Chang, S.W., Nguyen, D.D., Zhang, X.B., Liang, H., Xue, S., 2020a. Selective carbon sources and salinities enhance enzymes and extracellular polymeric substances extrusion of Chlorella sp. for potential co-metabolism. Bioresour. Technol. 303, 122877.

Vo, H.N.P., Ngo, H.H., Guo, W., Nguyen, K.H., Chang, S.W., Nguyen, D.D., Liu, Y.W., Liu, Y., Ding, A., Bui, X.T., 2020b. Micropollutants cometabolism of microalgae for wastewater remediation: Effect of carbon sources to cometabolism and degradation products. Water Res. 183, 115974.

Vo, H.N.P., Ngo, H.H., Guo, W., Nguyen, T.M.H., Liu, Y.W., Liu, Y., Nguyen, D.D., Chang, S.W., 2019. A critical review on designs and applications of microalgae-based photobioreactors for pollutants treatment. Sci. Total Environ. 651, 1549–1568.

Wang, J.L., Wang, S.Z., 2018. Microbial degradation of sulfamethoxazole in the environment. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 102, 3573–3582.

Wang, J.L., Zhuan, R., 2020. Degradation of antibiotics by advanced oxidation processes: An overview. Sci. Total Environ. 701, 135023.

Wang, L.F., Li, Y., Wang, L., Zhu, M.J., Zhu, X.X., Qian, C., Li, W.W., 2018a. Responses of biofilm microorganisms from moving bed biofilm reactor to antibiotics exposure: Protective role of extracellular polymeric substances. Bioresour. Technol. 254, 268–277.

Wang, L., Liu, Y.L., Ma, J., Zhao, F., 2016a. Rapid degradation of sulphamethoxazole and the further transformation of 3-amino-5-methylisoxazole in a microbial fuel cell. Water Res. 88, 322–328.

Wang, R., Diao, P.P., Chen, Q., Wu, H., Xu, N., Duan, S.S., 2017a. Identification of novel pathways for biodegradation of bisphenol A by the green alga Desmodesmus sp.WR1, combined with mechanistic analysis at the transcriptome level. Chem. Eng. J. 321, 424–431.

Wang, S.J., Poon, K., Cai, Z.W., 2018b. Removal and metabolism of triclosan by three different microalgal species in aquatic environment. J. Hazard. Mater. 342, 643–650.

Wang, Y., Ho, S.H., Cheng, C.L., Guo, W.Q., Nagarajan, D., Ren, N.Q., Lee, D.J., Chang, J.S., 2016b. Perspectives on the feasibility of using microalgae for industrial wastewater treatment. Bioresour. Technol. 222, 485–497.

Wang, Y.M., Lin, Z.Y., Su, X.S., Zhao, P.C., Zhou, J., He, Q., Ai, H.N., 2019. Cost-effective domestic wastewater treatment and bioenergy recovery in an immobilized microalgal-based photoautotrophic microbial fuel cell (PMFC). Chem. Eng. J. 372, 956–965.

Wang, Y.H., Liu, J.Z., Kang, D., Wu, C.X., Wu, Y.H., 2017b. Removal of pharmaceuticals and personal care products from wastewater using algae-based technologies: a review. Rev. Environ. Sci. Bio. 16, 717–735.

Wells, M., 2006. Log Dow: Key to understanding and regulating wastewater-derived contaminants. Environ. Chem. 3, 439–449.

WHO, 2014. Antimicrobial resistance: Global report on surveillance. World Health Organization (ISBN: 9241564741).

Wu, Y.H., Li, T.L., Yang, L.Z., 2012. Mechanisms of removing pollutants from aqueous solutions by microorganisms and their aggregates: A review. Bioresour. Technol. 107, 10–18.

Xiao, R., Zheng, Y., 2016. Overview of microalgal extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) and their applications. Biotechnol. Adv. 34, 1225–1244.

Xie, B.H., Tang, X.B., Ng, H.Y., Deng, S.H., Shi, X.Q., Song, W.L., Huang, S.J., Li, G.B., Liang, H., 2020a. Biological sulfamethoxazole degradation along with anaerobically digested centrate treatment by immobilized microalgal-bacterial consortium: Performance, mechanism and shifts in bacterial and microalgal communities. Chem. Eng. J. 388, 124217.

Xie, P., Chen, C., Zhang, C.F., Su, G.Y., Ren, N.Q., Ho, S.H., 2020b. Revealing the role of adsorption in ciprofloxacin and sulfadiazine elimination routes in microalgae. Water Res. 172, 115475.

Xie, Z.X., Lu, G.H., Yan, Z.H., Liu, J.C., Wang, P.F., Wang, Y.H., 2017. Bioaccumulation and trophic transfer of pharmaceuticals in food webs from a large freshwater lake. Environ. Pollut. 222, 356–366.

Xiong, J.Q., Kim, S.J., Kurade, M.B., Govindwar, S., Abou-Shanab, R.A.I., Kim, J.R., Roh, H.S., Khan, M.A., Jeon, B.H., 2019. Combined effects of sulfamethazine and sulfamethoxazole on a freshwater microalga, Scenedesmus obliquus: toxicity, biodegradation, and metabolic fate. J. Hazard. Mater. 370, 138–146.

Xiong, J.Q., Kurade, M.B., Abou-Shanab, R.A., Ji, M.K., Choi, J., Kim, J.O., Jeon, B.H., 2016. Biodegradation of carbamazepine using freshwater microalgae Chlamydomonas mexicana and Scenedesmus obliquus and the determination of its metabolic fate. Bioresour. Technol. 205, 183–190.
Xiong, J.Q., Kurade, M.B., Jeon, B.H., 2017a. Biodegradation of levofloxacin by an acclimated freshwater microalga, Chlorella vulgaris. Chem. Eng. J. 313, 1251–1257.
Xiong, J.Q., Kurade, M.B., Jeon, B.H., 2017b. Ecotoxicological effects of enrofloxacin and its removal by monoculture of microalgal species and their consortium. Environ. Pollut. 226, 486–493.
Xiong, J.Q., Kurade, M.B., Jeon, B.H., 2018. Can microalgae remove pharmaceutical contaminants from water? Trends Biotechnol. 36, 30–44.
Xiong, J.Q., Kurade, M.B., Kim, J.R., Roh, H.S., Jeon, B.H., 2017c. Ciprofloxacin toxicity and its co-metabolic removal by a freshwater microalga Chlamydomonas mexicana. J. Hazard. Mater. 323, 212–219.
Xiong, J.Q., Kurade, M.B., Patil, D.V., Jang, M., Paeng, K.J., Jeon, B.H., 2017d. Biodegradation and metabolic fate of levofloxacin via a freshwater green alga, Scenedesmus obliquus in synthetic saline wastewater. Algal Res. 25, 54–61.
Xiong, Q., Liu, Y.S., Hu, L.X., Shi, Z.Q., Cai, W.W., He, L.Y., Ying, G.G., 2020. Co-metabolism of sulfamethoxazole by a freshwater microalga Chlorella pyrenoidosa. Water Res. 175, 115656.
Yan, W.F., Xiao, Y., Yan, W.D., Ding, R., Wang, S.H., Zhao, F., 2019. The effect of bioelectrochemical systems on antibiotics removal and antibiotic resistance genes: A review. Chem. Eng. J. 358, 1421–1437.
Yang, K., Lu, J., Jiang, W., Jiang, C., Chen, J., Wang, Z., Guo, R., 2017. An integrated view of the intimate coupling UV irradiation and algal treatment on antibiotic: Compatibility, efficiency and microbic impact assessment. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 5, 4262–4268.
Yang, Y.Y., Song, W.J., Lin, H., Wang, W.B., Du, L.N., Xing, W., 2018. Antibiotics and antibiotic resistance genes in global lakes: A review and meta-analysis. Environ. Int. 116, 60–73.
Ying, G.G., He, L.Y., Ying, A.J., Zhang, Q.Q., Liu, Y.S., Zhao, J.L., 2017. China must reduce its antibiotic use. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51, 1072–1073.
Yu, Y., Zhou, Y.Y., Wang, Z.L., Torres, O.L., Guo, R.X., Chen, J.Q., 2017. Investigation of the removal mechanism of antibiotic ceftazidime by green algae and subsequent microbic impact assessment. Sci. Rep. 7, 4168.
Zandalinas, S.I., Mittler, R., 2018. ROS-induced ROS release in plant and animal cells. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 122, 21–27.
Zeraatkar, A.K., Ahmadzadeh, H., Talebi, A.F., Moheimani, N.R., McHenry, M.P., 2016. Potential use of algae for heavy metal bioremediation, a critical review. J. Environ. Manage. 181, 817–831.
Zhang, B., Li, W., Guo, Y., Zhang, Z.Q., Shi, W.X., Cui, F.Y., Lens, P.N.L., Tay, J.H., 2020a. Microalgal-bacterial consortia: From interspecies interactions to biotechnological applications. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 118, 109563.
Zhang, B.L., Sun, L.B., Song, X.R., Huang, D., Li, M.C., Peng, C.C., Wang, W., 2021a. Genetically engineered thermotolerant facultative anaerobes for high-efficient degradation of multiple hazardous nitroalkanes. J. Hazard. Mater. 405, 124253.
Zhang, J.Y., Gan, W.H., Zhao, R.X., Yu, K., Lei, H.X., Li, R.Y., Li, X.Y., Li, B., 2020b. Chloramphenicol biodegradation by enriched bacterial consortia and isolated strain Sphingomonas sp. CL5.1: The reconstruction of a novel biodegradation pathway. Water Res. 187, 116397.
Zhang, L., Johnson, N.W., Liu, Y., Miao, Y., Chen, R.H., Chen, H., Jiang, Q., Li, Z., Dong, Y.H., Mahendra, S., 2021b. Biodegradation mechanisms of sulfonamides by Phanerochaete chrysosporium - Luffa fiber system revealed at the transcriptome level. Chemosphere 266, 129194.
Zhang, Q.Q., Ying, G.G., Pan, C.G., Liu, Y.S., Zhao, J.L., 2015. Comprehensive evaluation of antibiotics emission and fate in the river basins of China: source analysis, multimedia modeling, and linkage to bacterial resistance. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49, 6772–6782.
Zhao, X.D., Li, X.J., Li, Y., Zhang, X.L., Zhai, F.H., Ren, T.Z., Li, Y.T., 2021. Metagenomic analysis reveals functional genes in soil microbial electrochemical removal of tetracycline. J. Hazard. Mater. 408, 124880.
Zhao, Z.M., Song, X.S., Wang, Y.H., Wang, D.Y., Wang, S.Y., He, Y., Ding, Y., Wang, W., Yan, D.H., Wang, J.F., 2016. Effects of algal ponds on vertical flow constructed wetlands under different sewage application techniques. Ecol. Eng. 93, 120–128.
Zietzschmann, F., Stutzer, C., Jekel, M., 2016. Granular activated carbon adsorption of organic micro-pollutants in drinking water and treated wastewater - Aligning breakthrough curves and capacities. Water Res. 92, 180–187. 