# Occurrence of pharmaceuticals and personal care products in bottled water and assessment of the associated risks

## A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Pharmaceuticals and personal care products
Bottled water
Health risk assessment
Residue

The occurrence of 187 pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) was investigated in bottled water samples (35 and 33 from Chinese and foreign brands, respectively). Forty-four compounds belonging to 14 PPCP categories were detected in 56 of the 68 bottled water samples. Further, more than 35% of water samples contained at least three PPCPs, and in one particular sample, 11 different PPCPs were detected. Macrolides constituted the most prevalent PPCP category, and salbutamol, erythromycin, and azithromycin showed the highest detection frequency (17.6%). The thermal stabilities of the 187 PPCPs were determined, and the results obtained showed that only 35 out of the 187 compounds were degraded by more than 50% after boiling for 5 min. Even though the risk quotients (RQs) of detected PPCPs showed low risk levels, the RQs of 13 compounds with RQs ≥ 0.0001 were 2–4 fold higher in infants than in other life stages. Moreover, further studies are necessary to evaluate the toxicity of PPCP mixtures, the effects of PPCPs on human intestinal microbiota, and their risk of induction of drug-resistant bacteria and drug-resistant genes.

## 1. Introduction

Pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) have contributed significantly to safeguard the health of humans and animals, and their use has now become an essential part of every healthy society. However, the release of PPCPs into the aquatic environment is inevitable due to their widespread use. In recent years, trace levels of PPCPs have been detected in sewage, surface water, groundwater, precipitation, and drinking water. Even though PPCP levels in water are typically from sub-ng/L to ng/L, some evidence suggests that they are potentially harmful to human health, exhibiting carcinogenic, teratogenic, mutagenic effects and reproductive developmental toxicity. Additionally, exposure to PPCPs in drinking water can result in a systematic effect on human body physiology owing to the disruption of the normal functioning of gut microbiota, which have been linked to many immunity and metabolism related diseases. Therefore, the contamination of aquatic environments by PPCPs has become an emerging area of concern.

Bottled water has become a popular drinking water source in many areas, owing to its quality, taste, and portability. However, to date, only a few studies have reported PPCP concentrations in bottled water. Li et al. studied the presence of triclosan, 4-nonylphenol, and bisphenol A in bottled water samples in Guangzhou, China. The detection frequencies of 4-nonylphenol, bisphenol A, and triclosan were 100, 81, and 86%, respectively, and their concentrations were in the ranges of 108–298, 17.6–324, and 0.6–9.7 ng/L, respectively. The investigation of the presence of sulfonamides in Italian bottled water samples showed C. Wang et al. Environment International 155 (2021) 106651

sulfonamide concentrations in the range 9–80 ng/L. Further, Lardy-Fontan et al. determined the presence of 20 PPCPs in commercial bottled water samples from European countries. Their results showed that only metformin, salicylic acid, and gabapentin had concentrations above the limit of detection (LOD). Furthermore, D´evier et al. investigated the potential presence of 120 organic contaminants in bottled natural mineral water samples corresponding to two brands and observed only salicylic acid, ketoprofen, and caffeine, which all had concentrations below 1 ng/L. Additionally, Gonz´alez Alonso et al. conducted a screening of 58 pharmaceuticals in bottled water samples from Spain. Five bottles showed nicotine concentrations that varied in the range 7–15 ng/L, while other substances had concentrations that were below the limit of quantification (LOQ). In a recent study on the presence of PPCPs in bottled water, Ben et al. conducted a survey on the presence of 92 antibiotics in 14 brands of bottled water, showing average concentrations ranging from 180 to 666 ng/L. This study presents a reliable and effective confirmatory method for the analysis of 187 PPCPs in water using ultra-performance liquid chromatography-tandem quadrupole mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) to investigate the occurrence of 19 classes of PPCPs in 68 bottled water samples from 15 countries. Additionally, to better understand the risk of PPCP exposure via bottled water, the thermal degradation of the PPCPs as well as their associated health risks were also evaluated. Our results indicated that PPCP contamination in bottled water is a widespread phenomenon, and these compounds cannot be effectively removed by heating. The contamination of a sample by multiple PPCPs indicates that we should focus on the evaluation of the impacts of mixture toxicities of compounds on human health.

## 2. Material and methods

### 2.1. Materials and reagents

Methanol (MeOH), acetonitrile (ACN), ammonia, formic acid (FA), and blank water samples were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Ultrapure water was produced by a Milli-Q system. Syringe filters were obtained from Pall Corporation, and ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA), as well as hydrochloric acid, were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Cleanert PEP-2 solid-phase extraction (SPE) cartridges (60 mg, 3 mL) were supplied by Agela Technologies. All standards were prepared in mixed solutions for different PPCP classes. Detailed information on the standards is provided in Table S1.

### 2.2. Sample collection and analysis

A total of 68 bottled water samples from different brands were purchased from supermarkets or online between August and October 2020, and for each bottled water brand, three individual bottles of water with a volume of at least 500 mL were collected. The 68 samples were originated from China (35), Australia (1), Poland (1), Denmark (2), France (4), Fiji (1), Canada (2), the United States (1), Norway (1), Japan (9), Slovakia (1), Greece (1), New Zealand (2), Italy (6), and Chile (1). All the water samples were stored at 20 ◦C and analyzed within five days. For each batch of sample analysis, quality control samples including blank samples as the negative control and fortified samples as the positive control were prepared and analyzed to ensure the reliability of the analytical results.

### 2.3. Sample preparation

In a centrifuge tube, 200 mL of the water sample was introduced followed by the addition of EDTA (50 mg). Each sample was prepared twice using both methods A and B, which are different in terms of the pH of the loading sample solution and the equilibrium solution of the SPE cartridge. Specifically, for method A, the sample was adjusted to a pH of 3 using hydrochloric acid and thereafter, loaded onto the SPE cartridge at a flow rate of 5–8 mL/min. In this case, the cartridge was preconditioned using 3 mL each of MeOH and water adjusted to a pH of 3 using hydrochloric acid. Regarding method B, the sample was adjusted to a pH of 10 using ammonia, loaded onto the SPE cartridge at a flow rate of 5–8 mL/min, and the cartridge was preconditioned using 3 mL each of MeOH and water, which was also adjusted to pH 10 using ammonia. The cartridge was washed with 6 mL of water and dried for 30 s under vacuum. The analytes were eluted from the cartridge using a 3 mL mixture of methanol and acetonitrile (1:1, v/v). Thereafter, the eluate was collected and evaporated to dryness under nitrogen at 40 ◦C, and then reconstituted in 100 μL of MeOH and 400 μL of water via vortex mixing for 1 min.

### 2.4. Instrumental analysis

UPLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an AB Sciex Exion LC and Qtrap® 6500 + system using a Kinetex F5 (50 × 3.0 mm i.d., 2.6 μm) analytical column that was maintained at 40◦C. The injection volume was 5 μL, and the flow rate was 0.4 mL/min. For the 166 analytes that were to be detected in the positive mode, the mobile phases consisted of solvent A (0.1% FA in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN). The optimal linear gradient program were as follows: 0–1.0 min, 97% A; 1.0–1.1 min, 97–90% A; 1.1–9.5 min, 90–40% A; 9.5–9.6 min, 40–5% A; 9.6–11.5 min, 5% A; 11.5–11.6 min, 5–97% A; and 11.6–13.5 min, 97% A. The MS instrument was operated in the electrospray ionization positive (ESI+) mode via multiple reaction monitoring (MRM). The source parameters were: curtain gas, 30 psi; ionspray voltage, 5500 V; temperature, 500 ◦C; ion source gas 1, 50 psi; and ion source gas 2, 60 psi. For the remaining 21 analytes that were detected in the ESI negative mode, the ion spray voltage was set at 4500 V, and the mobile phase consisted of water (solvent A) and ACN (solvent B). The same LC gradient conditions as those used in the positive mode were applied in the negative mode. The ion transitions and the optimized mass parameters are listed in Table S1.

### 2.5. Method validation

The specificity of the method was assessed by analyzing blank samples and the interference at the retention time of target compounds was checked. Calibration curves were used to evaluate the linearity of the method in the concentration range of 0.5–1000 ng/L, depending on the abundance of each analyte. To estimate the accuracy and precision of the method, recovery experiments prepared in six replicates were performed at three concentrations on three different days. The LOD and LOQ were determined using fortified samples yielding signal-to-noise ratios of 3 and 10, respectively.

### 2.6. Heat treatment of spiked water samples

In a 500 mL beaker, 200 mL of blank water was spiked with the 187 PPCPs at 100 ng/L. Five groups of spiked samples were prepared in triplicates. One group was used as unheated control samples, and the other four groups were heated to 100◦C for 0.5, 1, 2, 5 min, respectively. The water samples were cooled down naturally after heating, and then reconstituted to 200 mL with blank water in a volumetric flask. The control and heated samples were analyzed simultaneously using the proposed method.

### 2.7. Risk assessment of human health

To investigate the potential health risks associated with the presence of PPCPs in bottled water, the estimated daily intake (EDI) of PPCPs was evaluated based on the maximum concentrations of detected PPCPs and daily water intake per body weight. The results thus obtained were then compared with the acceptable daily intake (ADI) so as to highlight the risk of exposure to PPCPs via daily water consumption. The highest concentrations of PPCPs in bottled water samples were adopted, and the health risks associated with the detected PPCPs were assessed based on the age-dependent risk quotient (RQ) (equation (1)) by dividing the PPCP concentration (Cs) by the age-dependent drinking water equivalent level (DWEL). An RQ ≥ 1 indicates potential risk to human health. The DWEL was calculated with equation (2), and if ADI for a given PPCP was not available, it was calculated according to equation (3) based on the reported lowest observed adverse effect level (LOAEL) or the no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) if available.

```
Cs
RQ = DWEL                                                                               (1)

ADI × BW × HQ
DWEL = DWI × AB × FOE                                                                   (2)

ADI = UF1 × UF2 × UF3 × UF4 × UF5LOAELorNOAEL                                           (3)
```

The standard hazard quotient (HQ) and gastrointestinal absorption rate (AB) values of the PPCPs were assumed to be 1, and the frequency of exposure (FOE) was 0.96. The age-specific body weight (BW) and the 95th percentile values of daily water ingestion (DWI) for 17 age intervals from birth to 80+ years were applied to reduce the uncertainties in variation with respect to life stages. Given the absence of specific individual- and population-based data on daily bottled water consumption around the world, and considering that some individuals or groups only drink bottled water, it was assumed that all DWI comes from bottled water. This was to avoid possible underestimations of bottled water exposure levels. Eq. (3) included five types of uncertainty factors (UFs): UF1, extrapolation from LOAEL to NOAEL; UF2, duration of exposure; UF3, interspecies variation; UF4, intraspecies variation; and UF5, data quality. The values and considerations corresponding to each uncertainty factor were consistent with those recommended by the U.S. EPA and the literature.

## Results and discussion

### Method development and validation

For high sample throughput, during the preliminary experiment, attempts were made to detect all the target compounds simultaneously in both the ESI+ and ESI- modes. In general, to improve ionization efficiency, FA was added to the mobile phase when detecting compounds in the ESI+ mode. However, the sensitivities of the compounds detected in ESI- mode were significantly affected by this acidified mobile phase. Therefore, to achieve the best sensitivity instead of the best sample throughput, the target compounds were analyzed in the ESI+ and ESI- modes separately, using the same LC gradient conditions and mobile phase with or without FA for ESI+ and ESI-, respectively. The representative MRM chromatograms of all the analytes are shown in the supplementary materials.

SPE is the classical technique used to achieve the enrichment and purification of PPCPs in environmental samples. In this study, the Cleanert PEP-2 cartridge was adopted for SPE owing to its polyethylene divinylbenzene polymer adsorbent that tolerates all pH values (0–14). Additionally, the pyrrolidone and urea functional groups on its surface enable the realization of a balanced adsorption effect on both polar and non-polar substances. In the preliminary experiments, we compared the effects of Oasis HLB, a commonly used cartridge, and Cleanert PEP-2. The recoveries of more than 20 analytes using Oasis HLB were lower than those using Cleanert PEP-2, and even exceeded the acceptable range. The pH value of the water sample loaded onto the SPE cartridge was a critical factor that significantly affected recovery. To achieve better method accuracy, it was necessary to handle each sample in acidic and alkaline conditions separately due to the widely varying physicochemical properties of the 19 classes of PPCPs considered in this study.

Based on blank samples from different batches, no target compound exhibited noticeable interference at the retention time in the chromatogram. The method showed good linearity (r2 > 0.99) over the calibration range of each analyte. The following table summarizes the LODs and LOQs of the different PPCPs as well as their corresponding recovery and precision results. The LOQs of this study ranged from 0.04 to 9.00 ng/L. The LOQs for β-lactams (0.33–6.00 ng/L), quinolones (0.40–0.81 ng/L), macrolides (0.40–4.55 ng/L), sulfonamides (0.32–1.00 ng/L), and tetracyclines were lower than those obtained using existing methods. The recoveries were in the range 70.0–119.6%, with intra-day and inter-day relative standard deviations lower than 12.0 and 17.8%, respectively, indicating similar or better results than those reported in several previous studies.

### Occurrence of target PPCPs in bottled water

The concentrations of the PPCPs that were detected in the bottled water samples are shown in the supplementary materials. Fourteen classes of PPCPs, covering most of the categories of the target compounds, were identified in the bottled water samples. Among the 187 analytes, 44 were detected in 56 of the 68 bottled water samples from 14 countries, showing concentrations ranging from 0.27 (chloramphenicol) to 985 ng/L (methiocarb). Only the water samples from Poland were found to be uncontaminated by the target PPCPs. Twenty-four of the 68 bottled water samples (35.3%) contained three or more PPCPs. Particularly, three analytes, salbutamol, erythromycin, and azithromycin, exhibited the highest detection frequency (17.6%), and 11 different analytes (the largest number of PPCPs in a single sample) were detected in the water sample from Norway. Furthermore, insecticides (methiocarb, maximum, 985 ng/L; aldicarb, maximum, 191 ng/L) and pesticides (2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid, maximum, 774 ng/L) exhibited higher concentrations than other PPCP categories. A relatively high concentration of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (9700 ng/L) was also detected in river water samples, generating an RQ value of 3.3 in the risk assessment. The widespread use of these highly polar compounds may result in their accumulation in water.

Antibiotics were the most prevalent compounds, accounting for 61.4% of all the detected PPCPs, followed by asthma and antitussive drugs (9.1%), stimulants (9.1%), hormones (4.5%), cardiovascular drugs (4.5%), phenoxy carboxylic acid pesticides (4.5%), and carbamate insecticides (4.5%). The distribution of various types of PPCPs is shown in the supplementary materials. Among the detected antibiotics, the detection frequencies of tetracyclines, sulfonamides, phenicols, quinolones, β-lactams, and macrolides ranged from 2.2% to 36.3%. Additionally, macrolides exhibited the highest detection frequency; this observation is consistent with the results of a recent study. Of all the detected macrolides, azithromycin, a human antibiotic, and erythromycin, which is a human/veterinary antibiotic, but is preferably used as a human antibiotic, showed the highest detection frequency, and their median concentrations were 5.39 and 4.63 ng/L, respectively. In contrast, only one bottled water sample showed the presence of the veterinary antibiotics, tylosin and tilmicosin. | Category                                   | Percentage |
|--------------------------------------------|------------|
| Stimulants                                 | 9.1%       |
| Cardiovascular Drugs                       | 4.5%       |
| Asthma & Antitussive Drugs                | 9.1%       |
| Psychiatric Drugs                          | 2.3%       |
| Antibiotics                                | 61.4%      |
| Hormones                                   | 4.5%       |
| Phenoxy carboxylic acid pesticides         | 4.5%       |
| Carbamate Insecticides                     | 5%         |
| Tetracyclines                              | 2%         |
| Phenicols                                  | 8.8%       |
| B-Lactams                                  | 19.8%      |
| Quinolones                                 | 15.4%      |
| Sulfonamides                               | 7.8%       |
| Macrolides                                 | 36.3%      |
| Other Antibiotics                           | 9.9%       |

Fig. 1. Occurrence and distribution of PPCPs in bottled water samples. (A) The highest concentrations of PPCPs detected in bottled water samples from different countries. (B) Composition of detected PPCPs. (C) Detection frequency for all antibiotic types. C. Wang et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106651

respectively. Amoxicillin, a human/veterinary antibiotic, was the most prevalent β-lactam, with a detection frequency and median concentration of 14.7% and 6.32 ng/L, respectively. Cephalexin, which is also used as a human/veterinary antibiotic, was identified as the second most prevalent β-lactam, with a detection frequency and median concentration of 8.82% and 5.19 ng/L, respectively. The most prevalent quinolone, ofloxacin (a human/veterinary antibiotic), was detected in 7.4% of the samples and had a median concentration of 3.14 ng/L, followed by ciprofloxacin (a human/veterinary antibiotic) with a detection frequency of 5.9% and a median concentration of 0.91 ng/L. Furthermore, the veterinary antibiotic, enrofloxacin, was detected in 4.4% of the samples and its median concentration was 17.0 ng/L. Phenicols, including chloramphenicol, thiamphenicol, and florfennicol, showed a detection frequency of 11.8%. Globally, the use of chloramphenicol in veterinary medicine has been banned, while florfenicol is increasingly being used as its substitute. Based on the amount of florfenicol in use, it ranks among the top five veterinary drugs, and in this study, its detection frequency (5.9%) was different from that reported in a recent study (30% in Chinese brands and 22% in foreign brands of bottled water) by Ben et al. However, this detection frequency agreed with the results reported (6.7% in bottled water) by Wang et al.

Salbutamol showed the highest detection frequency with a median concentration of 0.94 ng/L. Additionally, clenbuterol was detected in three of the bottled water samples and it showed a median concentration of 5.2 ng/L. As already mentioned, salbutamol and clenbuterol are β-agonists, and they have been misused as growth promoters in the production of animals meant for consumption. Their use in veterinary medicine has been completely banned owing to their adverse cardiovascular and central nervous system effects and the potential risk of the presence of their residues in food products. However, such β-agonists are still used in human medicine to treat asthma, and it is difficult to determine their source in water samples because of the possibility that occasionally, they are used illegally in animal husbandry. The concentration of triclosan (detection frequency = 10.3%), a potential weak androgenic compound, ranged between 3.72 and 7.16 ng/L, in agreement with the concentrations reported in a previous study (0.6–9.7 ng/L). Other sex hormones, including testosterone and progesterone, were also detected in the bottled water samples. Additionally, caffeine, which stands as a promising indicator of urban fecal contamination, showed a relatively high detection frequency (13.2%) in the bottled water samples. However, this detection frequency is lower than that reported in a previous study on tap water.

3.3. Thermal stability of the PPCPs

Bottled water may be boiled to prepare tea or coffee, and during food preparation, it is also heated. As a result of the heating, the PPCPs present may be degraded, leading to a decrease in the risk of exposure. Therefore, in this study, thermal degradation experiments were performed by boiling spiked water samples (100 ng/L) for 0.5, 1, 2, and 5 min to evaluate the thermal stability of PPCPs. The results obtained for the 187 PPCPs that were investigated are shown in Fig. 2 and Table S5. Compared with the unheated samples, 120 PPCPs (64.2%) degraded by less than 20%. However, oxytetracycline and doramectin could not be detected after heating the water samples for 0.5 min, and the degradation rates of the other 17 compounds were above 50%, ranging from 53 (azithromycin) to 90% (chlortetracycline). Sulfonamides began to degrade after 1 min of boiling, and their concentrations were reduced significantly (>40%) in the samples that were boiled for 2 min. Notably, only 35 compounds (18.7%) degraded by more than 50% after boiling for 5 min. Among the 44 detected PPCPs, 28 degraded by less than 20% after boiling for 5 min, and four compounds (methiocarb, cefoperazone, C. Wang et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106651

oxytetracycline, and tilmicosin) degraded by more than 80%. Methio- may also threaten the growth and development of infants during the critical development period. Even though all the assessed PPCPs showed a low risk to human health based on their RQs, several potential uncertainties should not be neglected in the risk assessment. First, the risk associated with chloramphenicol contamination owing to the consumption of bottled water was not assessed given that its ADI could not be determined owing to its serious side effects, such as aplastic anemia. Additionally, its toxic effects are dose independent. Second, the detection frequency of β-lactams was 25%, ranking fourth among all the detected PPCP categories. It is also well known that β-lactams possess allergenic potential, and the possibility that β-lactam contamination via bottled water can evoke allergic reactions in highly sensitive individuals cannot be completely excluded. Third, in this study, it was observed that more than 35% of bottled water samples contained at least three PPCPs. However, there are no suitable risk assessment methods to evaluate the mixture toxicities of these compounds, which do not elicit significant toxic effects at low concentrations when considered individually. The results of previous studies indicated that PPCP mixtures could lead to increased acute toxicity. Therefore, a comprehensive assessment system should be established for the evaluation of the synergistic effects as well as possible interactions that could occur in complex PPCP mixtures, considering the observation that in this study, 11 PPCPs were detected in a single bottled water sample. Lastly, exposure to PPCPs in drinking water may lead to changes in the composition and metabolism of gut microbiota, possibly leading to systematic effects on the human body. It is also worth noting that chronic exposure to trace levels of antibiotics can contribute to the induction of drug-resistant bacteria and drug-resistant genes, which represent an increasing threat to global health.

3.4. Health risk assessment
In summary, a reliable UPLC-MS/MS method was developed and validated for the determination of 187 PPCPs in water. Using this method, the widespread occurrence of PPCPs in bottled water samples from 15 countries was observed. Thermal stability studies indicated that the degradation of most of the PPCPs in boiling water was limited, and heating did not significantly decrease the risk of PPCP exposure via bottled water. Additionally, the risk of human exposure to the detected PPCPs was assessed. Generally, the PPCPs showed low risk to human health; however, higher RQs were observed in early life stages. The RQs of the 35 assessed PPCPs ranged from 0.4752 to < 0.0001, and six compounds showed at least one life-stage RQ ≥ 0.01, while seven others showed RQs that were ≥ 0.0001 and < 0.01 in all life stages. Notably, the RQs of these 13 compounds in early life stages (<12 months) were 2–4 times higher than those in other life stages. Clenbuterol showed the highest RQ (0.4752), and in early life stages (<12 months), salbutamol also presented RQ > 0.01. These two β-agonists, whose application in animal husbandry has been banned, may pose a threat to the cardiovascular and central nervous systems of infants.

| Compound | RQ |
|----------|----|
| Clenbuterol | 0.4752 |
| Salbutamol | > 0.01 |
| Other Compounds | Various |

Fig. 3. Life-stage RQ profiles of selected PPCPs in bottled water. C. Wang et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106651

draft.     Dongyang            Ye:     Visualization,          Formal        analysis.      Xiaowei          Li: Methodology.            Yanbo Jia:           Methodology.            Liang Zhao:           Visualization.

Saiwa Liu: Investigation.                 Jian Xu: Investigation.               Jingjing Du:          Validation.    Lu Tian:        Validation.        Jing Li:       Validation.        Jianzhong Shen:               Supervision, Project administration.                     Xi Xia:       Writing - review            &   editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgement

This work was supported by National Key Research and Development Program of China (2018YFC1602400), National Natural Science Foundation of China (32072916), and China Agriculture Research System of MOF and MARA.

Appendix A.             Supplementary material

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2021.106651. C. Wang et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106651

Sharma, B.M., Beˇcanov´a, J., Scheringer, M., Sharma, A., Bharat, G.K., Whitehead, P.G., Kl´anov´a, J., Nizzetto, L., 2019. Health and ecological risk assessment of emerging contaminants (pharmaceuticals, personal care products, and artificial sweeteners) in surface and groundwater (drinking water) in the Ganges River Basin. India. Sci. Total Environ. 646, 1459–1467.
Tester, A.A., Logan, S., Pollock, L., McKie, A., 2020. Clenbuterol: a new toxic substance in paediatrics. BMJ Case Rep. 13, e233180.
Tijani, J.O., Fatoba, O.O., Babajide, O.O., Petrik, L.F., 2016. Pharmaceuticals, endocrine disruptors, personal care products, nanomaterials and perfluorinated pollutants: a review. Environ. Chem. Lett. 14, 27–49.
U.S. EPA., 2002. A Review of the Reference Dose and Reference Concentration Processes. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Risk Assessment Forum. Available from: https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2014-12/documents/rfd-final.pdf.
U.S. EPA., 2019. Exposure Factors Handbook Chapter 3 (Update): Ingestion of Water and Other Select Liquids. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Office of Research and Development. Available from: http://ofmpub.epa.gov/eims/eimscomm.getfile?p_download_id=538153.
Wang, H., Wang, N., Wang, B., Zhao, Q., Fang, H., Fu, C., Tang, C., Jiang, F., Zhou, Y., Chen, Y., Jiang, Q., 2016. Antibiotics in Drinking Water in Shanghai and Their Contribution to Antibiotic Exposure of School Children. Environ. Sci. Technol. 50, 2692–2699.
Wee, S.Y., Haron, D., Aris, A.Z., Yusoff, F.M., Praveena, S.M., 2020. Active pharmaceutical ingredients in Malaysian drinking water: consumption, exposure, and human health risk. Environ. Geochem. Health 42, 3247–3261.
Xu, M., Huang, H., Li, N., Li, F., Wang, D., Luo, Q., 2019. Occurrence and ecological risk of pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) and pesticides in typical surface watersheds. China. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 175, 289–298.
Yang, Y.Y., Toor, G.S., Wilson, P.C., Williams, C.F., 2017. Micropollutants in groundwater from septic systems: Transformations, transport mechanisms, and human health risk assessment. Water Res. 123, 258–267.
Yiruhan, Wang, Q.J., Mo, C.H., Li, Y.W., Gao, P., Tai, Y.P., Zhang, Y., Ruan, Z.L., Xu, J. W., 2010. Determination of four fluoroquinolone antibiotics in tap water in Guangzhou and Macao. Environ. Pollut. 158, 2350–2358.
Yuan, X., Qiang, Z., Ben, W., Zhu, B., Liu, J., 2014. Rapid detection of multiple class pharmaceuticals in both municipal wastewater and sludge with ultra high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. J. Environ. Sci. (China) 26, 1949–1959.
Zhang, J., Zhang, J., Liu, R., Gan, J., Liu, J., Liu, W., 2016. Endocrine-Disrupting Effects of Pesticides through Interference with Human Glucocorticoid Receptor. Environ. Sci. Technol. 50, 435–443. 