Environment International 155 (2021) 106693

**Paternal preconception phthalate exposure alters sperm methylome and embryonic programming**

**A B S T R A C T**

Preconception environmental conditions have been demonstrated to shape sperm epigenetics and subsequently offspring health and development. Our previous findings in humans showed that urinary anti-androgenic phthalate metabolites in males were associated with altered sperm methylation and blastocyst-stage embryo development. To corroborate this, we examined the effect of preconception exposure to di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) on genome-wide DNA methylation and gene expression profiles in mice. Eight-week old C57BL/6J male mice were exposed to either a vehicle control, low, or high dose of DEHP (2.5 and 25 mg/kg/weight, respectively) for 67 days (~2 spermatogenic cycles) and were subsequently mated with unexposed females. Reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) of epididymal sperm was performed and gastrulation stage embryos were collected for RRBS and transcriptome analyses in both embryonic and extra-embryonic lineages. Male preconception DEHP exposure resulted in 704 differentially methylated regions (DMRs; q-value < 0.05; ≥10% methylation change) in sperm, 1,716 DMRs in embryonic, and 3,181 DMRs in extra-embryonic tissue. Of these, 29 DMRs overlapped between sperm and F1 tissues, half of which showed concordant methylation changes between F0 and F1 generations. F1 transcriptomes at E7.5 were also altered by male preconception DEHP exposure including developmental gene families such as Hox, Gata, and Sox. Additionally, gene ontology analyses of DMRs and differentially expressed genes showed enrichment of multiple developmental processes including embryonic development, pattern specification and morphogenesis. These data indicate that spermatogenesis in adult may represent a sensitive window in which exposure to DEHP alters the sperm methylome as well as DNA methylation and gene expression in the developing embryo.

1. Introduction

Understanding the role of fathers in the etiology of offspring health and disease has attracted significant attention in recent years. A growing body of compelling data demonstrates that environmental exposures can be embodied within the developing male germ cell through epigenetic marks. In turn, these epigenetic marks may impart information at fertilization to affect the trajectory of development and offspring health. It is known that prenatal epigenetic reprogramming of male germ cells is a particularly susceptible window to environmental exposures; however, research has now emerged demonstrating that other such susceptible windows exist during spermatogenesis in the adult male. For example, nutritional manipulation in adult mice can result in epigenetic misregulation in sperm that affects offspring phenotypes. These findings are significant because they provide evidence that environmental exposures encountered by adult males contribute to reproductive success and offspring health via sperm epigenetics. At this point, research in this area has been largely restricted to the effects of nutritional manipulations. Thus, relatively little is known about how adult exposures to toxicants affect sperm epigenetics and without such knowledge, advancing our understanding of paternal environmental determinants of reproductive and offspring health remains limited. offspring health will be limited
Phthalates, a class of man-made, non-persistent endocrine-disrupting compounds (EDCs) used in plastics and personal care products, are ubiquitous environmental contaminants. Exposure to phthalates is widespread, such that urinary phthalate metabolites have been detected in the majority of individuals representing the US general population. Phthalate exposures have been reported to cause a host of developmental and male reproductive health issues. In particular, urinary phthalate metabolites concentrations in males is associated with poor sperm quality as well as a longer increase in time to pregnancy among general population and marked changes in the population of sperm transcripts. Of particular relevance to this current study, we have previously reported in our cohort receiving infertility treatment, Sperm Environmental Epigenetics and Development study (SEEDS), that male preconception anti-androgenic urinary phthalate metabolite concentrations, including the main metabolite of di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP), were associated with up to a 70% decrease in blastocyst (e.g., embryos at day 5 of development) quality even after adjusting for female phthalate exposures. Subsequently, we showed that these anti-androgenic phthalates were also associated with sperm DNA methylation profiles, in which urinary DEHP metabolites were associated with 100 sperm differentially methylated regions (DMRs). Interestingly, several of these DMRs were associated with blastocyst quality and gene ontology analyses found enrichment for terms such as in utero embryonic development and forebrain development. Taken together, these results suggest that phthalates may be associated with sperm methylation in or near genes relevant to early embryogenesis, providing a biological pathway linking the observed inverse associations between anti-androgenic phthalates and blastocyst quality
To this end, our objective here was to substantiate previous findings in our human cohort by designing a controlled experiment in mice to examine the susceptibility of sperm methylome to the effects of pre-conception exposure to DEHP and the persistence of sperm-derived changes to the epigenome and transcriptome during early development of embryos derived from exposed males

## 2. Materials and methods

### 2.1. Mice

Adult C57BL/6J (Jackson Laboratory, JAX 000664) males of reproductive age (8–9 weeks old) were administered 2.5 mg/kg/day DEHP, 25 mg/kg/day DEHP (Sigma Cat.# D201154, purity ≥ 99.5%), or a vehicle control (dimethyl sulfoxide (50%) and ethanol mixture (50%)) via osmotic pump implanted subcutaneously for 67 days, which approximates 2 spermatogenesis cycles. Given the no observable adverse effect level (NOAEL) for DEHP with male reproductive endpoint in rat is 4.8 mg/kg/day, we considered our 2.5 and 25 mg/kg/day exposure levels low and high doses respectively. Mice were distributed to experimental groups (n = 4/group) to achieve body weight match between groups. Throughout the exposure period, all animals, including the control group, were kept under the same micro-climatic condition as well as same water and food sources. All procedures followed the guidelines of the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and the approval for this study was received from the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at University of Massachusetts, Amherst

### 2.2. Sperm collection and DNA extraction

Caudal epididymal sperm from exposed and control studs was collected using a swim-up approach. Briefly, for each male mouse, both right and left distal caudal epididymis were incised longitudinally and incubated at 37◦C for 30 min in 1 mL of sperm wash buffer. Prior to DNA isolation from sperm pellets, sperm samples were subjected to a one-step density gradient centrifugation (40% Iso-late, Irvine Scientific, USA) in order to remove possible somatic contamination using Eppendorf 5810®centrifuge with bucket rotor A-4–44 and adapter for 15 mL conical tubes. DNA was extracted using the rapid method developed in our laboratory. Briefly, sperm cells were homogenized with 0.2 mm steel beads at room temperature in a mixture containing guanidine thiocyanate lysis buffer and 50 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP). The lysates were column purified and DNA quality of the eluate was determined using Nanodrop 2000 Spectrophotometer

### 2.3. Embryo collection

Gastrulation stage embryos were derived from unexposed DBA/J2 females crossed with exposed or control C57BL/6J males via natural mating, during which each male was paired with three females. Presence of copulatory plug the next morning indicated mating occurred and was considered embryonic day (E) 0.5. Following the development of gastrulation embryos at E7.5, the pregnant females were sacrificed via cervical dislocation. Embryos from individual litters were staged and micro-dissected in PBS. Specifically, embryonic and extra-embryonic tissues were carefully dissected with sharpened forceps and the separate tissues were pooled for DNA and RNA extraction. Each male (n = 3 males/exposure group) was considered a unit of statistical analysis and had a minimum of 9 embryos that were pooled from at least 2 females

### 2.4. RRBS

We performed bisulfite conversion on 100 ng of genomic DNA using the EpiTect Fast DNA Bisulfite kit from Qiagen and DNA libraries were constructed using the NUGEN Ovation RRBS Methyl-seq System according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Libraries were sequenced on Illumina HiSeq 2500 in the Deep Sequencing Core Facility of the University of Massachusetts Medical School with an average of 18 million single end reads (100-bp) per sample

### 2.5. Bioinformatic analysis

Raw reads were trimmed using TrimGalore and a NuGEN-specific adaptor trimming scripts available from GitHub. Trimmed reads were mapped using Bismark (–bowtie2 -n 1). Methylation counts were called using Bismark extract (-s –bedGraph). Differentially methylated regions were identified using Methyl kit (v1.14.2) pipeline. In brief, genome was tiled into a sliding 100 bp windows and weighted methylation level was calculated for each window. To minimize error in base calling, we filtered out bases with<10x coverage or more than the 99.9th percentile of coverage distribution and coverage values were normalized using default settings. We used logistic regression model for p-value calculation subsequently adjusted for multiple comparison (FDR) using SLIM method for final DMR identification. A cluster was defined as any 100 bp window with a minimum of 3 bases and was considered DMR if they had at least 10% methylation difference at FDR < 0.05. For sperm, we identified a total of 118,013 and 115,342 clusters in the low and high DEHP exposures respectively. In embryo there were 108,056 and 116,147 identified clusters while in extra embryos, 146,373 and 155, 105 clusters were identified in the low and high DEHP groups respectively. Spatial genomic annotations was conducted using annotatr package and annotated to the genic and CpG features of the Ensembl genome features were compared using the GenomicRanges package (v1.40.0) and BEDTools (v2.29.2) while interspecies genomic integration with ensemble IDs was performed using biomaRt package (v2.46.0). Since promoter and gene body methylation are important in gene regulation, prior to functional analyses, each DMR was assigned to closest gene within 1,500 bp of transcription start site (TSS) and gene body using mouse genome (mm10) assembly data from ENSEMBL via the annotatePeakInBatch function from the ChIPpeakAnno R package (v3.22.4). We used Metascape to determine the functional relevance of our DEHP-induced sperm and F1 DMRs as well as F1 DEGs to known biological processes. The ontology terms from Metascape were then plotted as dot plots using ggplot2 R package (v3.3.2), with size and color representing enrichment and negative log of pvalue. The canonical pathway and upstream regulators analyses of the DEGs were performed using the Ingenuity Pathway (IPA) System with default settings. Furthermore, we determined the genic (1–5 kb, promoters, 5′UTR, exons, introns, intergenic regions), and CpG features (island, shelves, shores, open sea) of clusters via annotations from Ensembl.

## 2.6. Quality control

To ensure sperm methylation results were not influenced by somatic cell contamination, we analyzed methylation signatures of selected paternally (Gtl2-Mirg) and maternally (Kcnqot1) expressed imprinted control region. For the paternally imprinted locus, average methylation for all exposure groups were above 95% and 0% methylation for the maternally imprinted loci, suggesting no somatic contamination.

## 2.7. RNA-sequencing

Total RNA was isolated using the Roche High Pure RNA Isolation Kit and was processed for library preparation. RNA quality was assessed with an Agilent 2100 BioAnalyzer using RNA 6000 Nano Chips and NanoDrop 1000, respectively. Approximately 500 ng total RNA was used to generate libraries following the Illumina TruSeq Stranded mRNA LT Sample Prep Kit protocol. Libraries were assessed using Agilent DNA 1000 Kit and Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kit. The Illumina NextSeq500 was used to generate 76-bp paired end reads. One replicate of pooled embryos from each group had poor sequencing quality due to RNA degradation and was excluded from downstream analyses, leaving us with n = 2 males/group. Reads were mapped to the mouse genome (mm10) using tophat. Importantly, polymorphic sites between C57BL/6J and DBA/2J were masked to improve mapping and reduce reference bias. Following mapping, SNP calling was performed with samtools. Differential expression analysis was performed using the classic edgeR pipeline.

## 2.8. Statistics

Fisher’s exact test was used to test for significant enrichment or depletion of our DMRs across tissue types in genomic feature relative to all identified clusters (p < 0.05). Comparison of F1 litter metrics and gene expression levels between the exposure conditions and the control was performed using t-test statistics (p < 0.05) in R software.

## 2.9. Data availability

The raw and processed RRBS and RNA-seq datasets from this study have been deposited on the GEO repository with accession number: GSE174093

## 3. Results

### 3.1. Reproductive outcomes and embryo development

To better understand the impacts of phthalate exposure on the preconception window of male germ cell development, we designed experiments where 8–9-week old C57BL/6J (B6) male mice were exposed to either a vehicle control, a low dose of DEHP (2.5 mg/kg/weight), or a high dose of DEHP (25 mg/kg/weight) for 67 days (~2 spermatogenic cycles) via a subcutaneous osmotic pump. Following exposure, males were mated with 8–9-week old DBA/2J (DBA) females. Following natural mating, we assessed litter size and quality and then collected gastrulation stage E7.5 (embryonic day 7.5) embryos for further analyses. We observed no difference in successful mating, pregnancy rates, the total number of decidua, embryos per litter, the number of empty decidua/litter, or embryo size between the control and exposed groups. These data suggest that male preconception DEHP exposure did not alter fertilization timing or gross embryonic development through gastrulation stages. While we did not allow embryos to develop until birth, these exposures produced embryos that successfully developed through preimplantation, implantation, and gastrulation, suggesting comparable fecundity between the conditions tested.

| Exposure                               | Control (vehicle only) | Low DEHP (2.5 mg/kg/day) | High DEHP (25 mg/kg/day) |
|----------------------------------------|------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|
| 67 day exposure                        | CS7BLI6J Stud          |                           |                           |
| 2 spermatogenesis cycles               |                        |                           |                           |
|                                        |                        |                           |                           |
|                                        |                        |                           |                           |
| Natural Mating                         |                        |                           |                           |
| DBA/2J Female                         | CS7BLI6J Stud          |                           |                           |
|                                        |                        |                           |                           |
|                                        |                        |                           |                           |
| Pregnant DBA2J                        | F1-E7.5                |                           |                           |

Fig. 1. Experimental scheme. Male C57Bl/6J mice were exposed for 67 days via osmotic pump and then naturally mated with unexposed DBA/2J females. Following mating, embryos were allowed to develop in vivo until gastrulation (E7.5). Embryos were collected, and the embryonic and extra-embryonic lineages were separated for DNA methylation and expression analysis. Additionally, sperm from exposed males were collected for DNA methylation analysis. ## Preconception DEHP exposure and sperm methylation

Next, we collected sperm from the DEHP-exposed adult male mice after mating with unexposed females and performed genome-wide methylation analyses via RRBS. Low and high DEHP exposure resulted in 342 and 294 unique differentially methylated regions (DMRs; ≥ 3 CpGs per region and > 10% methylation change) in sperm, respectively (q < 0.05) when compared to the control with 68 sperm DMRs overlapping between the two exposure levels. In terms of methylation direction and magnitude, low DEHP exposure induced a comparable number of hyper- (52%) and hypomethylated (48%) DMRs. In contrast, in the high exposure group, 72% of the sperm DMRs were hypomethylated.

To understand the biological relevance of our DEHP-induced DMRs in sperm, we performed a functional enrichment analysis for those DMRs within 1,500 bp distance of the nearest transcription start sites (TSS) or within the gene body. The resulting unique genes (low DEHP = 313, high DEHP = 243) were considered for downstream ontology analyses. For low exposure, the top unique functional term was the “establishment or maintenance of actin cytoskeleton polarity”, while “muscle structure development”, “muscle cell differentiation” and “synapse organization” were unique to high DEHP exposure. Top overlapping terms between the DEHP exposures were: “cell surface receptor signaling pathway involved in cell–cell signaling”; “Rho protein signal transduction”; “camera-type eye development”; “excitatory postsynaptic potential”; and “degradation of the extracellular matrix”.

Furthermore, we performed feature-specific enrichment analyses of the DEHP-induced DMRs within specific CpG and genic features. Overall, sperm DMRs were depleted within the proximal regulatory regions such as the promoters and CpG islands in both exposure groups as well as for those DMRs that overlapped between exposures. However, there were differences in the specific profiles of DMRs across E7.5 tissue types.

| Control | Low DMR; Control | High DMRs |
|---------|------------------|-----------|
| GO 1905114; Cell surface receptor signaling pathway involved in cell–cell signaling | GO 0060079: Muscle structure development | GO C930950: Establishment of actin cytoskeleton polarity |
| GO 0060079: Muscle cell differentiation | GO 0048663: Neuron differentiation | GO 0048663: Regulation of cell proliferation |
| GO 0050869: Cellular response to stimulus | GO 0048663: Neuron differentiation | GO 0050869: Cellular response to stimulus |

## Paternal preconception DEHP and embryonic methylation

Next, we sought to examine the effect of paternal preconception DEHP exposure on methylation profiles of E7.5 stage embryos derived from unexposed females. Due to the conservation of tissue-specificity of DNA methylation across vertebrates, separate methylation analyses were performed for both embryonic and extra-embryonic tissues. For embryonic tissue, low and high male DEHP exposure resulted in 727 and 831 unique DMRs, respectively, with 158 DMRs overlapping between the two exposures. Similar to our results in sperm from low DEHP, embryonic tissue displayed a comparable proportion of genome-wide hyper- (58%) and hypo-methylated (42%) DMRs. However, unlike in sperm, there was a more genome-wide hypermethylation in the high DEHP exposure group. For F1 extra-embryonic tissue, low and high DEHP exposure in males was associated with 1,784 and 1,162 unique DMRs, respectively, with 235 common DMRs between the two exposures. Additionally, we observed a more hypermethylation of the extra-embryonic DMRs as a result of male preconception DEHP exposure (low DEHP = 66%; high DEHP = 67%). Fig. 3. Regional methylation pattern in Embryonic (A - D) and extra-embryonic (E – H) tissues associated with low and high DEHP exposure in adult male (n ¼ 3) mice. Venn diagrams of embryonic (A) and extra-embryonic (E) DMRs between control vs low and control vs high DEHP exposure in sperm and their overlap. Heatmaps of average methylation patterns (n = 3 mice) in embryonic (B) and extra-embryonic (F) tissues for low and high DEHP exposure in sperm relative to control. Volcano plots of regional methylation difference between Control vs low (C & G) and control vs high (D & H) DEHP exposure in sperm (I) Dot plot of functional enrichment analysis of differentially methylated genes in both embryonic and extra-embryonic tissues. Each column represents tissue-specific experimental condition, the ranges of –log10 pvalues are color-coded while the diameter of the circles represents the enrichment scores.

GO tons of goncs 0f dMr:   cMbryonic

Reaton
Ornce
Cid4
Eeduur
88 01     88
Erbi

level, also showed less enrichment in the promoters and islands and were generally more hypermethylated.

Furthermore, we conducted ontology analyses of the unique genes associated with the DMRs across tissue types and experimental conditions (embryo: low DEHP = 613 and high DEHP = 679 unique genes; extra-embryo: low DEHP = 1,217 and high DEHP = 846 unique genes). Top enriched biological processes include “epidermal cell differentiation”, “cell–cell adhesion”, “head, cardiovascular, sensory and skeletal development”, and “embryonic organ development”. Interestingly, DMRs of genes that were shared across F1 tissue types were development-related genes including Pax gene family such as Pax1, Pax2, Pax5 and Pax6, Pax6os1 and Paupar, a Pax6 long non-coding RNA (lncRNA).

Lastly, we sought to determine if DEHP-induced sperm DMRs were also altered in F1 embryonic tissue. Interestingly, 15 DMRs overlapped between sperm and embryonic tissue while 14 DMRs were common between sperm and extra-embryonic tissue. Of these 29 DMRs, 52% displayed similar gains or losses of methylation in sperm and F1 embryos. Ontology analyses of these shared DMRs between sperm and F1 E7.5 tissues identified terms such as “cell surface receptor signaling pathway involved in cell-signaling” and “Rho protein signal transduction”. Taken together, our data indicate that male preconception DEHP exposure alters methylation profiles at specific loci in sperm, some of which are subsequently observed in F1 embryos, suggesting intergenerational transmission of epigenetic alterations in response to paternal DEHP exposure.

3.4.    Paternal preconception DEHP exposure and embryonic gene expression

In order to identify possible dysregulation of gene expression in F1 embryos as a result of male DEHP exposure, we performed RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) on micro-dissected embryonic and extra-embryonic cells. At least 9 individual embryos were pooled from 2 females per stud and multiple replicates were sequenced in order to mitigate subtle developmental stage variation per litter and embryo.

We found changes in gene expression in both the low and high DEHP exposure compared to the unexposed group. In the embryonic tissue, 12 and 81 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in the low and high exposure groups, respectively; while in the extra-embryonic tissues, 1,215 and 25 DEGs were identified in the low and high exposure groups, respectively. We observed minimal overlap in DEGs between the low and high DEHP exposure across the tissue types (embryo = 3 DEGs (Gm23935, Lefty2, Gm13339); extra-embryo = 3 DEGs (Tex13b, Prl8a2, Acta2)) and 4 (67%) of these overlapping DEGs showed expression changes in same directions by DEHP exposure level. Overall, the DEGs displayed differential expression patterns between low and high DEHP exposures for each tissue type.

To elucidate a biological significance of the DEGs, we performed gene ontology analyses across E7.5 tissue types and DEHP exposure levels. Top functional enrichment terms were “pattern specification process”, “chordate embryonic development”, “heart development”, “plasma membrane bounded cell projection morphogenesis”, “gland development” and “stem cell differentiation”. Some well-studied developmental regulators that were altered by DHEP exposure are Acta2, Prl8a2, Cdx1 and gene families including Gli, Hox, Sox, Gata. Our IPA analysis in embryonic tissue showed top enriched canonical terms included embryonic stem cell differentiation, cardiogenesis, and Wnt signaling pathways. For extra-embryonic tissue, top enriched canonical pathway included the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (Eif2) signaling, oxidative phosphorylation, and mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling. Upstream analysis of low preconception DEHP in extra-embryonic tissue also identified Rictor, a component of mTOR complex 2, as an inhibited regulator. Taken together, paternal preconception DEHP exposure disturbed gene expression profiles in E7.5 tissues at loci important for early development.

Finally, we examined the concordance of altered gene expression with DNA methylation in F1 tissues. We found a total of 68 genes with DEHP induced methylation change that were also differentially expressed at E7.5. Only 6 (8.8%) genes (Ntn1, A1cf, Impact, Gm15590, Gm35065, and Hoxd3) displayed promoter methylation profiles that showed inverse relationship with expression patterns, indicating limited concordance between F1 tissue methylation and gene expression profiles. O.A. Oluwayiose et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106693

| GO Term | Description | Log2 Fold Change (Low DEHP) | Log2 Fold Change (High DEHP) |
|---------|-------------|------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| GO:0007507 | Heart development | | |
| GO:0030182 | Transcription | | |
| GO:0048583 | Response to growth factor | | |
| GO:0006550 | Urcacnitl sustot | | |
| GO:0008284 | Cell proliferation | | |
| GO:0048803 | Development | | |
| GO:0107369 | Gastrulation | | |
| GO:0335051 | Cardiac cell differentiation | | |
| GO:0006613 | Ribonucleoprotein complex | | |

Fig. 4. Differential gene expression in F1 tissues following adult male (n ¼ 2) DEHP exposure. Volcano plots of embryonic (A, B) and extra-embryonic (C, D) tissues comparing log2FC(CPM) for control versus low (A, C) and control vs high (B, D) DEHP exposure. Purple and orange datapoints indicate genes with significant up- and down-regulation respectively (FDR < 0.05) compared to control. Heatmap showing log2FC(CPM) for all differentially expressed genes in embryonic (E) and extra-embryonic (F) tissues for both low and high DEHP conditions compared to control. (G) Dot plot of functional enrichment analysis of DEGs in both embryonic and extra-embryonic tissues. Each column represents tissue-specific experimental condition, the ranges of –log10 p-values are color-coded while the diameter of the circles represents the enrichment scores.

4. Discussion
Our results show that DEHP exposure resulted in > 350 sperm DMRs in each low and high DEHP exposure group, while 68 DMRs (~17%) were shared between exposures. The lack of complete concordance of sperm DMRs between exposure groups is not surprising given the potential for non-monotonic effects of DEHP at different levels of exposures, a unique property of endocrine disruptors. Interestingly, functional analysis of the shared DMRs were found to be associated with several developmental pathways including excitatory postsynaptic potential, extracellular matrix organization, regulation of symbiosis and actin filament organization. Data on the effect of preconception DEHP or other EDC exposures on sperm epigenetics is minimal; however, our SEEDS cohort identified a total of 131 sperm DMRs, via the 450 K array, associated with all the assayed urinary phthalate metabolites. Moreover, 100 of these sperm DMRs (76%) were associated specifically with DEHP metabolites (MEHP, MEOHP, MECPP). While none of the DEHP-associated DMRs overlapped between studies potentially owing to biological differences in spermatogenesis in men and mice and technical differences (450 K vs RRBS), it is notable that similarities in ontology terms were found in both studies related to cellular function and cytoskeletal maintenance, which are known to play a key role in fertilization and embryo development. Overall, our findings here, similar to our human data, suggest that paternal preconception DEHP exposures alter sperm methylation profiles among genes related to biological pathways for development. Due to the global post-fertilization epigenetic reprogramming, the relevance of the environmental legacy of the sperm epigenome to early-life development and offspring health remains in question. While it is known that certain regions of the sperm epigenome such as imprinted genes and repetitive sequences escape pre-implantation epigenetic reprogramming, a growing body of literature suggests that environmental conditions before conception can shape not only the offspring epigenome but also the future health of progeny. For example in rodents, paternal high fat diet and traumatic olfactory experience before conception induced similar methylation profile and phenotypic outcomes in F0 and F1 sperm, suggesting that certain sperm DMRs may escape epigenetic reprogramming events after fertilization to confer intergenerational transmission of environmental conditions. In line with these studies, we show here that paternal DEHP exposure prior to conception altered the embryonic and extra-embryonic methylome, which were functionally enriched in genes associated with several biological processes related to development. We observed that 29 (~7%) sperm DMRs were also altered in E7.5 tissues in both experimental conditions, of which 15 (52%) DMRs displayed concordant methylation patterns between F0 and F1 generations. These DMRs were enriched in functional terms related to membrane signaling including Rho protein signal transduction. Rho GTpase membrane signaling plays a versatile role in numerous biological processes including cell cycle progression, cell migration, and actin cytoskeletal organization, thus their aberrant regulation have been linked to embryonic lethality. Our results support the notion that DNA methylation changes at specific loci can be transmitted to the next generation as a consequence of DEHP exposure.

Most notably, we observed altered methylation profiles of Pax gene family in F1 tissues. Pax genes are paired box gene family encoding transcription factors that regulate cellular differentiation and embryonic tissue development including thymus (Pax1), lymphocytes (Pax5), ear and kidney (Pax2) as well as central nervous system (Pax2 and Pax6) and eye development (Pax6). Conversely, altered expression of Paupar, a single exon lncRNA located on exon1 of Pax6os1 non-coding sequence, regulates Pax6 expression linked to dysregulation of in vitro neural growth and differentiation. Since we observed no DEHP-dependent change in E7.5 morphological litter metrics (embryo length, embryo/litter, etc), our results suggest that the affected developmental pathways may have consequences later in embryonic development and/or during adult life.

Another intriguing observation from our study was that more DEHP-induced DMRs were found in embryonic and extra-embryonic tissues compared to sperm. While a mechanistic explanation for this amplified effect in the extraembryonic DNA methylome is unclear, we cannot rule out the interplay of other epigenetic mechanisms that are delivered to the oocyte along with the paternal haploid genome in semen including chromatin packaging and non-coding RNA. Indeed, exposure of adult male mice to 250 and 500 mg/kg/day DEHP by oral gavage was reported to reduce sperm count and H3K9 mono- and di-methylation. Additionally, in humans, dibutyl phthalate exposures from medication usage markedly affected sperm RNA elements. Thus, it is likely that DEHP not only modified methylation but other epigenetic factors in sperm, which in turn mediated events of altered embryonic methylation profiles.

Paternal DEHP exposure, concomitant with embryonic methylation changes, resulted in altered gene expressions across E7.5 tissue types, corresponding to 16 – 19 days post-fertilization embryo in human. However, only few of these genes were differentially expressed between exposure levels and across tissue types, emphasizing the potential for non-monotonic effects of DEHP at different levels. Overall, the majority of DEGs were functionally relevant in ontology terms related to pattern specification, embryonic development, morphogenesis and stem cell differentiation across exposure levels and F1 tissues. These functional terms were enriched in critical developmental genes including Cdx1, Acta2 and families of Hox, Gli, Gata and Sox. For example, in embryo, Homeobox Hox and Caudal Type Homeobox (Cdx) genes encode transcription factors that interact to play an important role in body patterning along the anterior-posterior axis; Glioma-Associated Oncogene Homolog (Gli) transcriptional factors in hedgehog signaling pathway regulates vertebrates limb bud patterning. Also, Gata gene family, specifically Gata4/5/6, encode transcription factors that function in reprogramming of cellular pluripotency and direct lineage-specific mesendodermal differentiation into multiple organs such as heart, liver and lung while Sox, Sry- related high mobility group (HMG) box, family of transcription factors importantly regulate cell fate and differentiation, with closely related Sox4 and Sox11 linked to the development of retinal cells and spinal cord. Not surprisingly, mutations in these genes have been linked to morphological defects, embryonic lethality and developmental phenotypes. Conversely, in extra-embryonic tissue, Acta2, which encode smooth muscle-specific alpha-actin involved in placenta vasculature and decidual prolatin-related genes (Prl8a2) are important for pregnancy success as altered regulation is implicated in varieties of pregnancy complications including preeclampsia, preterm birth, and pregnancy failure. Interestingly, our pathway analysis revealed potential dysregulation of Eif2 and mTOR complex signaling in extra-embryonic tissue. These pathways have been shown to interact to influence maternal-to-fetal nutrient transfer and implicated in fetal growth alterations in rodents.

Lastly, we observed a moderate correlation between F1 embryonic DMRs and gene expression in this study. There were 68 genes in F1 tissues (predominantly in extra-embryonic tissue of low DEHP exposure) that displayed both differential expression and differential methylation. However, most of these DMRs were located within gene bodies, in which methylation status may be unrelated to transcription levels. Moreover, for extra-embryonic tissue, this is not surprising given the recent findings that associations between DNA methylation and gene expression in human placenta were reported to be non-linear, dependent on the genomic context (e.g., promoter vs. gene body) and variable across different gestational periods. Additionally, the regulation of key developmental genes has been attributed to other epigenetic mechanisms. For example, nuclear dynamics, small noncoding RNA, translational regulation as well as chromatin deposition has been proposed to play a role in the temporal regulation of Hox genes along their clustering architecture.

Conclusion

In sum, our study reveals that paternal preconception exposure to phthalate plasticizer, DEHP, can alter sperm methylome with potential intergenerational effects on the methylome and transcriptome of F1 embryos. This study provides the foundation for future research to examine other epigenetic mechanisms in sperm (e.g., chromatin deposition and noncoding RNAs) and F1 allele-specific transcriptomes that may be responsive to preconception DEHP exposure as well as the mixture of environmental exposures. Additional larger studies are also warranted to confirm our observed results. Given the responses in epigenetic and developmental gene profiles were observed in males at DEHP levels below the NOAEL, our data highlights the sensitivity as well as the need for the consideration of male preconception environment in risk assessment analysis of DEHP exposures.

Abbreviations              Full name
SEEDS                      Sperm Environmental Epigenetics and Development Study
RRBS                       Reduced representation bisulfite sequencing
DMRs                       Differentially methylated regions
DEGs                       Differentially expressed genes
TSS                        Transcription start sites
lncRNA                     Long non-coding RNA Abbreviations                     Full name

E7.5                              Embryonic day 7.5
NOAEL                             No observable adverse effect level
EDC                               Endocrine disrupting chemicals
MEHP                              mono(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (MEHP)
MEOHP                             mono(2-ethyl-5-oxohexyl) phthalate (MEOHP)
MCPP                              mono (3-carboxypropyl) phthalate (MCPP)

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A. Supplementary material

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2021.106693. O.A. Oluwayiose et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106693

Ohmaru-Nakanishi, T., Asanoma, K., Fujikawa, M., Fujita, Y., Yagi, H., Onoyama, I., Hidaka, N., Sonoda, K., Kato, K., 2018. Fibrosis in preeclamptic placentas is associated with stromal fibroblasts activated by the transforming growth factor-beta1 signaling pathway. Am. J. Pathol. 188, 683–695.
Palencia-Campos, A., Ullah, A., Nevado, J., Yildirim, R., Unal, E., Ciorraga, M., Barruz, P., Chico, L., Piceci-Sparascio, F., Guida, V., de Luca, A., Kayserili, H., Ullah, I., Burmeister, M., Lapunzina, P., Ahmad, W., Morales, A.V., Ruiz-Perez, V.L., 2017. GLI1 inactivation is associated with developmental phenotypes overlapping with Ellis–van Creveld syndrome. Hum. Mol. Genet. 26, 4556–4571.
Phuyal, S., Farhan, H., 2019. Multifaceted rho GTPase signaling at the endomembranes. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 7, 127.
Quinlan, A.R., Hall, I.M., 2010. BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic features. Bioinformatics 26, 841–842.
Quinonez, S.C., Innis, J.W., 2014. Human HOX gene disorders. Mol. Genet. Metab. 111, 4–15.
Robinson, M.D., McCarthy, D.J., Smyth, G.K., 2010. edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26, 139–140.
Rosario, F.J., Nathanielsz, P.W., Powell, T.L., Jansson, T., 2017. Maternal folate deficiency causes inhibition of mTOR signaling, down-regulation of placental amino acid transporters and fetal growth restriction in mice. Sci. Rep. 7, 3982.
Sasaki, H., Matsui, Y., 2008. Epigenetic events in mammalian germ-cell development: reprogramming and beyond. Nat. Rev. Genet. 9, 129–140.
Schatten, H., Sun, Q.Y., 2014. Posttranslationally modified tubulins and other cytoskeletal proteins: their role in gametogenesis, oocyte maturation, fertilization and Pre-implantation embryo development. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 759, 57–87.
Shu, J., Zhang, K., Zhang, M., Yao, A., Shao, S., Du, F., Yang, C., Chen, W., Wu, C., Yang, W., Sun, Y., Deng, H., 2015. GATA family members as inducers for cellular reprogramming to pluripotency. Cell Res. 25, 169–180.
Skinner, M.K., Haque, C.G.-B.M., Nilsson, E., Bhandari, R., McCarrey, J.R., 2013. Environmentally induced transgenerational epigenetic reprogramming of primordial germ cells and the subsequent germ line. PLoS ONE 8, e66318.
Soshnikova, N., Duboule, D., 2009. Epigenetic temporal control of mouse hox genes in vivo. Science 324, 1320–1323.
Thein, D. C., Thalhammer, J. M., Hartwig, A. C., Bryan Crenshaw III, E., Lefebvre, V., Wegner, M. & Sock, E. 2010. The closely related transcription factors Sox4 and Sox11 function as survival factors during spinal cord development. 115, 131-141.
Tremblay, M., Sanchez-Ferras, O., Bouchard, M., 2018. GATA transcription factors in development and disease. Development 145, dev164384.
Tyser, R. C. V., Mahammadov, E., Nakanoh, S., Vallier, L., Scialdone, A. & Srinivas, S. 2020. A spatially resolved single cell atlas of human gastrulation. bioRxiv.
Vaissiere, T., Sawan, C., Herceg, Z., 2008. Epigenetic interplay between histone modifications and DNA methylation in gene silencing. Mutation Research/Reviews in Mutation Research 659, 40–48.
van de Ven, C., Bialecka, M., Neijts, R., Young, T., Rowland, J.E., Stringer, E.J., van Rooijen, C., Meijlink, F., N´ovoa, A., Freund, J.-N., Mallo, M., Beck, F., Deschamps, J., 2011. Concerted involvement of Cdx / Hox genes and Wnt signaling in morphogenesis of the caudal neural tube and cloacal derivatives from the posterior growth zone. Development 138, 3451–3462.
Vance, K.W., Sansom, S.N., Lee, S., Chalei, V., Kong, L., Cooper, S.E., Oliver, P.L., Ponting, C.P., 2014. The long non-coding RNA Paupar regulates the expression of both local and distal genes. The EMBO J. 33, 296–311.
Wehbe, H., Henson, R., Meng, F., Mize-Berge, J., Patel, T., 2006. Interleukin-6 contributes to growth in cholangiocarcinoma cells by aberrant promoter methylation and gene expression. Cancer Res. 66, 10517–10524.
Wei, Y., Yang, C.-R., Wei, Y.-P., Zhao, Z.-A., Hou, Y., Schatten, H., Sun, Q.-Y., 2014. Paternally induced transgenerational inheritance of susceptibility to diabetes in mammals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111, 1873–1878.
Wu, H., Ashcraft, L., Whitcomb, B.W., Rahil, T., Tougias, E., Sites, C.K., Pilsner, J.R., 2017a. Parental contributions to early embryo development: influences of urinary phthalate and phthalate alternatives among couples undergoing IVF treatment. Human Reproduction 32, 65–75.
Wu, H., de Gannes, M.K., Luchetti, G., Pilsner, J.R., 2015a. Rapid method for the isolation of mammalian sperm DNA. Biotechniques 1 (58), 293–300.
Wu, H., Estill, M.S., Shershebnev, A., Suvorov, A., Krawetz, S.A., Whitcomb, B.W., Dinnie, H., Rahil, T., Sites, C.K., Pilsner, J.R., 2017b. Preconception urinary phthalate concentrations and sperm DNA methylation profiles among men undergoing IVF treatment: a cross-sectional study. Hum. Reprod. 32, 2159–2169.
Wu, H., Hauser, R., Krawetz, S.A., Pilsner, J.R., 2015b. Environmental susceptibility of the sperm epigenome during windows of male germ cell development. Curr. Environ. Health Rep. 2, 356–366.
Xie, W., Barr, C.L., Kim, A., Yue, F., Lee, A.Y., Eubanks, J., Dempster, E.L., Ren, B., 2012. Base-resolution analyses of sequence and parent-of-origin dependent DNA methylation in the mouse genome. Cell 148, 816–831.
Young, T., Rowland, J.E., van de Ven, C., Bialecka, M., Novoa, A., Carapuco, M., van Nes, J., de Graaff, W., Duluc, I., Freund, J.N., Beck, F., Mallo, M., Deschamps, J., 2009. Cdx and Hox genes differentially regulate posterior axial growth in mammalian embryos. Dev. Cell 17, 516–526.
Zeng, Y., Chen, T., 2019. DNA methylation reprogramming during mammalian development. Genes (Basel) 10 (4), 257.
Zhou, J., Sears, R.L., Xing, X., Zhang, B., Li, D., Rockweiler, N.B., Jang, H.S., Choudhary, M.N.K., Lee, H.J., Lowdon, R.F., Arand, J., Tabers, B., Gu, C.C., Cicero, T.J., Wang, T., 2017. Tissue-specific DNA methylation is conserved across human, mouse, and rat, and driven by primary sequence conservation. BMC Genomics 18, 724.
Zhou, Y., Zhou, B., Pache, L., Chang, M., Khodabakhshi, A.H., Tanaseichuk, O., Benner, C., Chanda, S.K., 2019. Metascape provides a biologist-oriented resource for the analysis of systems-level datasets. Nat. Commun. 10, 1523. 