Persistent organic pollutants and the size of ovarian reserve in reproductive-aged women

Keywords:
Ovary
Ovarian reserve
Anti-Müllerian hormone
Female fertility
Persistent organic pollutants

Industrial chemicals such as persistent organic pollutants (POPs) have been associated with reduced fertility in women, including longer time-to-pregnancy (TTP), higher odds for infertility, and earlier reproductive senescence. Fertility is highly dependent on the ovarian reserve, which is composed of a prenatally determined stock of non-growing follicles. The quantity and quality of the follicles decline with age, thereby eventually leading to menopause. In the clinical setting, assessing ovarian reserve directly through the histological analysis of follicular density in ovaries is not practical. Therefore, surrogate markers of ovarian reserve, such as serum anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) are typically used. Here, we studied associations between chemical exposure and ovarian reserve in a cohort of pregnant women undergoing elective caesarean section (n = 145) in Stockholm, Sweden. Full data (histological, clinical, serum) were available for 50 women. We estimated the size of the reserve both directly by determining the density of follicles in ovarian cortical tissue samples, and indirectly by measuring AMH in associated serum samples. Concentrations of 9 organochlorine pesticides (OCPs), 10 polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), 3 polybrominated diphenylethers (PBDEs) and 9 perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) were determined in serum, and clinical data were retrieved from electronic medical records. Healthy follicle densities (median 0, range 0–193 follicles/mm3) and AMH levels (median 2.33 ng/mL, range 0.1–14.8 ng/mL) varied substantially. AMH correlated with the density of growing follicles. Twenty-three chemicals detected in more than half of the samples were included in the analyses. None of the chemicals, alone or as a mixture, correlated with AMH, growing or atretic follicles. However, HCB, transnonachlor, PCBs 74 and 99 were associated with decreased non-growing follicle densities. HCB and transnonachlor were also negatively associated with healthy follicle density. Further, mixture of lipophilic POPs (PBDE 99, p,p’-DDE, and PCB 187) was associated with lower

Abbreviations: AFC, antral follicle count; AMH, anti-Müllerian hormone; BMI, body mass index; CI, confidence interval; CV, coefficient of variation; FSH, follicle stimulating hormone; GC–MS/MS, gas chromatography, tandem mass spectrometry; GM, geometric mean, HCB, hexachlorobenzene; HCH, hexachlorocyclohexane; IQR, interquartile range; LA, lipid-adjusted; LC-MS/MS, liquid chromatography/triple quadrupole mass spectrometry; LOD, limit of detection; LOQ, limit of quantification; OCP, organochlorine pesticide; OR, odds ratio; PBDE, polybrominated diphenyl ethers; PCB, polychlorinated biphenyl; PeCB, pentachlorobenzene; PFAS, perfluoroalkyl substances; PFDA, perfluorodecanoic acid; PFDoA, perfluorododecanoic acid; PFHpA, perfluoroheptanoic acid; PFHxS, perfluorohexane sulfonic acid; PFHxA, perfluorohexanoic acid; PFNA, perfluorononanoic acid; PFOS, perfluorooctanesulfonic acid; PFOA, perfluorooctanoic acid; PFUnDA, perfluoroundecanoic acid; p,p’-DDE, dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene; p,p’-DDT, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane; POP, persistent organic pollutant; TTP, time-to-pregnancy; WQS, weighted quantile sum. non-growing follicle densities. In addition, exposure to HCB, p,p’-DDE, and mixture of OCPs were significantly associated with higher odds of infertility. The results suggest that exposure to chemicals may reduce the size of ovarian reserve in humans, and strongly encourage to study mechanisms behind POP-associated infertility in women in more detail.

# Introduction

Fertility in women is dependent on ovarian follicles that contain immature oocytes. All follicles are formed during fetal development and should last for the reproductive lifespan of the woman. At most, there are a few million non-growing follicles in the ovaries of the female fetus during mid-gestation, and thereafter, the numbers decrease. At the onset of puberty, a few hundred thousand follicles remain. Menopause commences when the number of follicles has decreased to a level that cannot sustain the hormonal secretion required for menstrual cycle. On average, the age at the onset of natural menopause is around 50 years. Cessation of menstrual cycles before the age of 40 years is classified as premature ovarian insufficiency.

Ovarian reserve is the sum of non-growing follicles in the ovaries. Some investigators consider this pool to be comprised of primordial follicles only while others include all unilaminar follicles, namely primordial, intermediary and primary. The ability to assess the size of ovarian reserve is important in reproductive medicine when ovarian health and fecundity of a woman is investigated for infertility treatments. There are no direct ways of counting the numbers of non-growing follicles present in ovaries in vivo, and therefore, several surrogate markers are used instead. For example, antral follicle count (AFC), serum levels of follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), estradiol and anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) are commonly used to estimate ovarian reserve although all these markers relate more directly to growing follicles. AMH is a growth factor secreted by primary, secondary and small antral follicles up to about 4 mm in diameter. It has become an established biomarker of ovarian reserve due to several advantages over other methods: serum AMH can be easily measured from a single blood sample and the levels do not significantly fluctuate during ovarian cycle. However, AMH also has its limitations. It may fluctuate during the course of pregnancy. While it is mostly used in fertility investigations, AMH does not predict fecundability or other outcomes in the general population. The value of AMH as a biomarker of ovarian reserve in healthy women, and factors affecting its level, still needs more research.

Several reviews have raised concerns about the effects of pervasive exposure to industrial chemicals on reproductive health in women. Major international organizations highlight the need to study chemical disruption of female reproductive system in more detail, including the Endocrine Society, World Health Organization and International Pollutants Elimination Network, and the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics. Epidemiological studies have revealed significant associations between exposure to endocrine-disrupting chemicals and endometriosis, uterine fibroids, polycystic ovary syndrome, irregular menstrual cycles, infertility and earlier onset of menopause. Recently, the burden of reproductive diseases in women caused by chemical exposures was estimated to cost 1.4 billion euros a year in the European Union. This estimate was based on only two chemicals (DDE and DEHP) and two diseases (endometriosis and uterine fibroids) and is therefore likely an underestimate.

Assessing the impact of chemical exposures on fecundity in women is challenging. Epidemiological studies focusing on chemicals and female fertility in humans typically use the outcomes time-to-pregnancy (TTP) and infertility, which is defined as inability to conceive after 12 months of regular unprotected sexual intercourse. In assisted reproduction, live birth rate can also be used. Exposure to air pollution, pesticides, and endocrine-disrupting chemicals has been linked to difficulties in conceiving in multiple cohort studies. Persistent organic pollutants (POPs), in particular, have been shown to decrease fertility in humans and other animals. For example, our recent study on Swedish women revealed that levels of POPs in serum in women older than 29 years of age and not taking oral contraceptives were associated with longer TTP and higher odds for infertility. This observation is in line with multiple other studies showing that exposure to POPs correlates with longer TTP, worse outcome in assisted reproduction, and earlier reproductive senescence.

POPs are halogenated organic industrial chemicals that are resistant to degradation because of their high stability. They have long half-lives in humans, ranging from 1 to 30 years. They bioaccumulate and are toxic to both humans and wildlife. Examples of POPs are organochlorine pesticides (OCPs), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) and perfluoroalkyls substances (PFASs). While the first three groups are lipophilic in nature and bioaccumulate in adipose tissue depots, PFASs are amphiphilic and predominantly circulate bound to plasma protein. Common routes of exposure are through ingestion, inhalation, absorption, fetal transfer, and breastfeeding. Although some POPs are banned decades ago through the Stockholm Convention due to persistence and toxicity, they still ubiquitously exist in the environment and remain a global health concern. Especially long-lived species are affected. For example, it was recently estimated that the global killer whale populations feeding at high trophic levels are at high risk of population collapse within 100 years due to PCB toxicity.

A limitation of epidemiological studies on the effects of chemical exposure on fertility in humans is that they give limited information on possible mechanisms of action and on the affected prospective parent. For example, outcomes such as TTP, infertility and live birth depend on the fertility of both prospective parents and their relative contributions are difficult to ascertain. In this study, we wanted to focus specifically on fertility in women and investigated associations between chemical exposures and ovarian reserve. Using a cohort of pregnant women undergoing caesarean section, we had a unique opportunity to measure the size of ovarian reserve in two ways: directly by counting the numbers of follicles in biopsied ovarian tissue samples, and indirectly by measuring the level of AMH in serum by retrieving biobanked samples collected during routine first visit for antenatal care. Concentrations of 31 POPs were measured in the same serum samples. Collectively, our results confirm the often reported association of POPs with higher odds for infertility (TTP > 12 months) and further suggest that exposure to lipophilic POPs associates with lower ovarian reserve. Although the cohort was relatively small, this encourages to pursue studies on chemicals and germ cell quantity in women in more detail, a topic that has been studied for decades in men. ## 2. Materials and methods

### 2.1. Study participants and sample collection

The cohort of women analyzed in this study (n = 145) was recruited at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge in Stockholm, Sweden, during years 2015–2018. Women undergoing elective caesarean section were continuously recruited to our research projects where the effects of environmental chemicals on ovaries are studied. The women received written and oral information about the project from midwives when they were booked for the surgery and signed a written informed consent in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Inclusion criteria were: gestational age > 37 weeks at planned date for cesarean section and no significant comorbidities or complications in the current pregnancy. Exclusion criteria were presence of risk factors for excessive intra-/post-operative hemorrhage, known ovarian disease or previous ovarian surgery. The women consented to giving a small ovarian tissue sample from one of their ovaries and to retrieval of data from their medical records for research on chemicals and fertility. All biological samples and data were pseudonymized with random codes and handled according to the European General Data Protection Regulation.

During the caesarean section, ovarian cortical tissue of maximum diameter of 5 mm and thickness of 2 mm was biopsied from one of the ovaries after closure of uterine incision following delivery of the baby and the placenta. Hemostasis was secured before closing the abdomen. By combining ovarian biopsy with the caesarean section, invasiveness of the procedure was reduced. Risks associated with ovarian biopsy are low. Furthermore, the effect on fertility from an ovarian biopsy of this size is negligible. The procedure was not carried out if the ovaries were not easily accessible, extra dissection would have been required or the ovaries did not look healthy (i.e. had obvious abnormalities such as any cystic / solid tumors or endometriotic / hemorrhagic / necrotic lesions on visual inspection intraoperatively). The sample collection was also cancelled in case of any intraoperative complications, such as excessive bleeding. The samples were placed in 37 ◦C Dulbecco’s phosphate buffered saline upon collection in the operating theater, and immediately processed in the research laboratory within 10 min of retrieval. The tissue samples were registered to Stockholm Medical Biobank in agreement with the Swedish Biobank in Medical Care act. The tissue samples were used for determination of the ovarian reserve by histology as described below.

Serum samples from the same donors of the respective ovarian tissue samples were retrieved through the Stockholm Medical Biobank where serum samples collected during the first trimester visit to antenatal maternity care were routinely stored if the woman had given her consent for biobanking. These samples were used for quantification of chemicals and AMH as described below. This project was approved by the Swedish Ethical Review Authority.

### 2.2. Direct determination of ovarian reserve by histology

A 2x2 mm piece of every tissue sample was fixed freshly in Bouin’s fixative for the histological quantification of the ovarian reserve, and the remaining tissue was used in our other on-going research. After a 2-hour Bouin-fixation at room temperature, the samples were carefully washed in 70% EtOH and then embedded in paraffin within a week. Twenty-five consecutively cut serial tissue sections were prepared at 4 μm thickness, stained with Hematoxylin-Eosin, and digitalized with Mirax Slide scanner using 20X objective at the Morphological Phenotype Analysis facility of Karolinska Institutet. Follicles were then counted and scored using Panoramic Viewer Software as primordial, intermediary, primary, late primary, secondary, or atretic based on morphological criteria: primordial follicles were identified as those surrounded by one layer of flattened granulosa cells, intermediary were classified as those having a mixture of flattened and cuboidal granulosa cell, primary follicles were surrounded by one full layer of cuboidal granulosa cells, late primary follicles were surrounded by more than one layer but less than two full layers of cuboidal granulosa cells, and secondary follicles were classified as those with at least two full layers of cuboidal granulosa cells. Follicles were scored as atretic if the oocyte had a pyknotic nucleus or irregular shape, and/or the granulosa cells were pyknotic. Only follicles with visible oocyte nucleus were counted, and the follicles were followed through the serial sections to avoid double counting. The area (mm2) of each section was measured using ImageJ software, added together, and multiplied by the section thickness (4 μm) to obtain analyzed volume (mm3) of the sample. Follicle density (foll/mm3) was calculated by dividing the number of follicles by analyzed volume.

The density of non-growing follicles (ovarian reserve) was calculated in two ways: as density of primordial follicles only, and as density of unilaminar follicles (primordial, intermediary, and primary follicles combined). Growing follicle density was considered as the sum of late primary and secondary follicle densities. Healthy follicle density was the sum of primordial, intermediary, primary, late primary and secondary follicle densities. In addition, atretic follicle density was calculated and considered in the statistical analyses.

### 2.3. Indirect determination of ovarian reserve by serum anti-Müllerian hormone

AMH was measured in the samples using a commercially available AMH ELISA kit (revised Gen II ELISA assay) following manufacturer’s instructions. The kit has a measurement range of 0.05–22.5 ng/mL, intra-assay coefficient of variation (CV) < 10.3%, and inter-assay CV < 10.8%. Samples, bovine AMH positive controls, and calibration curve together with the assay buffer were added to microtitration wells pre-coated with anti-AMH antibody, incubated for 1 h at room temperature and washed using a plate washer. The AMH antibody-biotin conjugate was then added to the wells and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. After subsequent washing, the streptavidin-enzyme conjugate was added and incubated for 30 min at room temperature. Wells were then washed again, and tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) chromogen solution was added and incubated for 8–12 min. The reaction was stopped and the enzymatic turnover was read at 450 nm using a plate reader. AMH concentration in serum samples was calculated using the calibration curve.

### 2.4. Determination of fertility

We utilized clinical data on TTP of current pregnancy to estimate the possible effect of the chemicals on fertility. We categorized the women as fertile (<12 months) or infertile (>12 months) following the criteria established by the World Health Organization. Importantly, this criterion that set a cut-off at 12 months is used to harmonize the definition of infertility on an international level. Infertility is not equivalent to sterility and women classified as infertile may still achieve pregnancy after one year of trying, like in our cohort that consists of pregnant women.

### 2.5. Quantification of persistent organic pollutants in the serum samples

We measured 22 lipophilic POPs and 9 PFASs in the serum samples. Nine OCPs (pentachlorobenzene (PeCB), hexachlorobenzene (HCB), three isomers of hexachlorocyclohexane (α-HCH, β-HCH, γ-HCH), oxychlordane, transnonachlor, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (p,p’-DDT) and its metabolite dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (p,p’-DDE)), ten PCB congeners (PCB 74, 99, 118, 138, 153, 156, 170, 180, 183 and 187) Fig. 1. Representative pictures of the different follicle stages in this cohort. (A) Primordial follicle, (B) intermediary follicle, (C) primary follicle, (D) late primary follicle, (E) secondary follicle, and (F) atretic follicle. Arrow points at a pyknotic granulosa cell and the hashtag the irregularly shaped oocyte. Scale bar is 50 μm.

and three PBDEs (PBDE 47, 99, and 153) were analyzed using accredited method for serum samples as described before. Briefly, ethanol and toluene-dissolved 13C-labeled internal standards of all measured POPs were added to all samples in glass vials. Samples were mixed thoroughly to induce precipitation of proteins. Activated silica was added to the samples together with dichloromethane-hexane (1:4) to initiate POP extraction through an SPE-column containing 44% sulfuric acid silica, 10% AgNO3–silica and sodium sulfate–silica mixture (1:2, v/v). Extraction was repeated three times and eluate was concentrated to 15–20 μL to prepare for analysis using gas chromatography-triple quadruple mass spectrometry (GC–MS/MS). Instruments used for this analysis were Agilent 7010 GC–MS/MS system (Wilmington, DE, USA), GC column DB-5MS UI (J&W Scientific, 20 m, ID 0.18 mm, 0.18 μm). Limit of detection (LOD) of our samples ranged from 2 pg/mL to 15 pg/mL while limit of quantification (LOQ) ranged from 5 pg/mL to 40 pg/mL.

Concentrations of nine PFASs (perfluorohexane sulfonic acid (PFHxS), perfluorohexanoic acid (PFHxA), perfluoroheptanoic acid (PFHpA), perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS), perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), perfluorononanoic acid (PFNA), perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA), perfluoroundecanoic acid (PFUnDA), perfluorododecanoic acid (PFDoA)) were analyzed as described previously. The analyses of PFOA and PFOS are part of the Erlangen Round Robin inter-laboratory control program and the laboratory has qualified as HBM4EU laboratory (European biomonitoring initiative, Horizon 2020) for the analysis of PFHxS, PFHpA, PFOS, PFOA, PFNA, PFDA, PFUnDA, and PFDoDA in serum. Briefly, for preparation of the samples, labeled internal standards of all measured PFASs were added together with glucuronidase and was digested for 90 min at 37 ◦C. Proteins were precipitated using acetonitrile under vigorous shaking. The sample was centrifuged prior to analysis using triple quadrupole mass spectrometry (QTRAP 5500; AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) coupled to a liquid chromatography system (LC/MS/MS). LOD ranged from 10 pg/mL to 20 pg/mL while LOQ ranged from 30 pg/mL to 60 pg/mL.

Table 1
Cohort characteristics.

|                   | n   | All women      | n   | Women with serum | n   | Women without serum |
|-------------------|-----|----------------|-----|-------------------|-----|---------------------|
| Maternal age      | 132 | 35 (31–37)     | 60  | 34 (31–37)       | 72  | 36 (32–37)         |
| BMI# (kg/m2)      | 125 | 25 (21.7–27.9) | 56  | 24.5 (21.7–27.9) | 69  | 25 (21.7–27.9)     |
| Parity§           | 132 | 2 (1–3)        | 60  | 2 (1–3)          | 72  | 2 (2–3)            |

Values are median (interquartile range). #During first antenatal visit, §Excluding current pregnancy.

In order to adjust the concentrations of the lipophilic POPs with serum total lipid levels, we also measured total cholesterol and total triglycerides in the samples through enzymatic colorimetric kits, namely Cholesterol CHOD-PAP and Triglycerides GPO-PAP, respectively. The cholesterol kit has a measurement range of 3–800 mg/dL and CV 0.8% and the triglyceride kit has a measurement range of 4–1000 mg/dL and CV 1.5%. Briefly, 5 μL serum was diluted with 5 μL water, where 100 μL of each specific reagent was added. The mixture was incubated for 30 min at room temperature. Absorbance was measured at 492 nm using a microplate spectrophotometer (Tecan Infinite F500, Tecan group Ltd., Männedorf, Switzerland). Color intensity was directly proportional to triglyceride and cholesterol concentration. Precinorm U (Cobas, Roche Diagnostics, GmBH, Mannheim) was used to determine standard curve. Human serum pool from 8 healthy volunteers, who signed the informed consent form in adherence to the Declaration of Helsinki, was prepared at the Div. of Clinical Chemistry, Dept. of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet at Huddinge University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden and used as internal control reference. To calculate the total lipid concentration, we used the following formula: total lipids = 2.27*total cholesterol + triglycerides + 62.3 mg/dL.

All statistical analyses were performed using the R programming language through RStudio with the packages ggplot2, ggpubr, reshape2, mice, dichromat, and gWQS. R.D. Björvang et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106589

The statistical models were controlled for known covariates of fertility, namely body mass index (BMI), which was measured at the time of the first visit to antenatal maternity care during the first trimester, age, and parity. Twenty-three chemicals that were detected in more than half of the samples were included in further analyses. Among these chemicals, concentrations below LOD were replaced with LOD/2. The lipophilic POPs were considered both as crude and lipid-adjusted (LA) by dividing the chemical with the total lipids. Multiple imputation by chained equations was done for missing data on lipids (5%) and BMI (7%). To compare exposure patterns between Sweden and the United States, we utilized chemical concentrations in serum of women aged 20–39 years in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) in 2015–2016 conducted by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the United States.

Serum samples were available for 41% of the women in the cohort. To compare the characteristics of women with and without serum samples, differences in age, BMI, and parity were tested with Wilcoxon rank sum test. We then tested the relationship between histologically-determined ovarian reserve and AMH levels in the serum. AMH levels as well as age, BMI and parity were compared between women whose biopsied ovarian tissue samples contained follicles and those whose did not using Wilcoxon rank sum test. Correlations between AMH and follicle density of different stages (primordial, unilaminar, growing, healthy and atretic) were investigated using Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient. We then assessed the associations between chemicals and ovarian reserve using both single chemical and chemical mixture approaches. Chemical concentrations in serum were compared between women whose biopsied ovarian tissue samples contained follicles and those whose did not using Wilcoxon rank sum test. We used linear and logistic regression adjusted for age, BMI, and parity to study associations of individual chemicals to AMH, primordial follicle density, unilaminar follicle density, growing follicle density, healthy follicle density, atretic follicle density, and infertility (yes/no). To reduce skewness, data on chemical concentrations, AMH levels and follicle densities + 1 were log10-transformed. Chemical mixture analyses were carried out in two ways. First, adding the chemicals in the same group (e.g. OCPs together) to get the sum. Second, we used weighted quantile sum (WQS) regression, a strategy suitable for highly correlated datasets such as chemical exposures, which is used for estimating empirical weights for a weighted sum of quartiles associated with health outcomes. Chemicals of concern were identified with a threshold of 7.1% (100% divided by 14 chemicals) for lipophilic POP mixture (both crude and lipid-adjusted), and 11.1% (100% divided by 9 chemicals) for PFAS mixture. To perform the WQS analysis, the dataset was split into 40% training set and 60% validation set, where the significance of the WQS index is based on the validation set. By leaving more in the validation set, there is increased power for the significance of the WQS index. Models were adjusted for age, BMI and parity. Both positive and negative associations were tested. In all analyses, significance was defined as p < 0.05, and associations 0.05 < p < 0.10 were also denoted in figures.

## Results and discussion

### Cohort characteristics

The study cohort consisted of women who underwent elective caesarean section at the Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge. During the period 2015 –2018, there were 145 women who participated in the study. We were able to retrieve serum samples for 60 (41%) of them from the Stockholm Medical Biobank where antenatal serum samples were stored if the woman had consented to biobanking. These samples stem from first trimester visit to antenatal care when blood samples were taken for routine pregnancy screening, such as blood group determination, hemoglobin concentration and infectious disease serology (hepatitis, HIV, rubella and syphilis). Biobanking of these samples for future research is voluntary, and it is unknown why only 41% of the women in our cohort consented to blood biobanking when they all consented to participate in our study. Clinical data were available for 132 women, and ovarian tissue for histological examination for 115 women. Full data were available for 50 women. Cohort characteristics are described in Table 1. There were no significant differences between women who had a biobanked serum sample compared to those who did not.

### Ovarian reserve

Follicles were found in 58 out of the 115 available tissue samples. As follicles are unevenly distributed throughout the cortex, a random cortical biopsy can yield a sample that does not contain follicles even in a woman of reproductive age. Follicle numbers and densities found in our cohort were similar to those from whole ovaries. When follicles were found, they were most commonly primordial (35.7%) or intermediary (37.8%); primary (10.6%) and atretic follicles (9%) remained in minority. This distribution was in agreement with Gougeon and Chainy. Median follicle densities were 0 for all categories and varied substantially between women as expected: primordial (range 0–107.5 follicles/mm3), unilaminar (range 0–179.5 follicles/mm3), growing (range 0–31.8 follicles/mm3) and atretic follicles (range 0–84 follicles/mm3). AMH was above the limit of detection in 59 serum samples (one sample was excluded because it was below the standard curve), and the median AMH concentration was 2.33 ng/mL (IQR 1.15–3.96 ng/mL). This was comparable with first trimester AMH levels (median 2.48 ng/mL, IQR 1.00–3.56 ng/mL) of similarly aged pregnant women. We next studied whether serum AMH levels correlated with the presence and density of follicles in the ovaries. First, we divided the women into those with follicles present in their ovarian tissue sample and those whose tissue sample contained no follicles. Although the presence or absence of follicles in a single small piece of ovarian tissue does not predict the size of the ovarian reserve in an individual woman, by probabilistic mathematics, the likelihood of follicles being present in such sample is higher in women who have larger ovarian reserve. Therefore, on a population level, the presence and absence of follicles can be used as an estimate of the size of the reserve. Indeed, we found significantly higher serum AMH in women whose ovarian tissue samples contained follicles compared to those without follicles. These two groups of women did not significantly differ in age, BMI, or parity. However, there was borderline difference in age and BMI, which may suggest attenuation of the relationship between AMH and presence of follicles. We then studied statistical dependence between serum AMH and follicle densities using Spearman rank correlation. Modest yet significant positive correlation was found between AMH and the density of growing follicles in the samples. Correlations between AMH and primordial, unilaminar, healthy, and atretic follicle densities were not significant. Altogether, the data suggest that serum AMH measured in the first trimester of pregnancy and growing follicle density in biopsied ovarian cortical tissue samples obtained at term have a certain dependency on each other although clear strong correlations were absent. Physiologically, AMH is secreted by the granulosa cells of follicles from primary to small antral stages. As follicles migrate towards medulla as they grow, the small antral stages are seldom seen in cortical tissue samples like ours. Although secreted by growing follicles, AMH is Fig. 2.  Availability of histological data, clinical data, and serum samples in the cohort of 145 women undergoing caesarean section in the study. Evaluated endpoints are indicated, and the numbers of patients included in these analyses.

used as a biomarker of ovarian reserve i.e. non-growing follicles present in the cortex. In our cohort, AMH did not correlate with numbers of cortical non-growing follicles. There could be many factors that explain this lack of association. For example, the serum samples were drawn in the first trimester of pregnancy whereas the biopsied ovarian tissue samples were taken at term. AMH is known to decrease from first trimester to third trimester during pregnancy, hence the levels at term could have been different. This is supported by the fact that the AMH levels in our cohort (median 2.33 ng/mL, IQR 1.15–3.96 ng/mL) were higher than that reported in the third trimester (median 1.06 ng/mL, IQR 0.20–1.45 ng/mL). Another factor that might play a role is the rate of follicle growth activation which is known to be suppressed by the hypogonadotropic state of pregnancy. Finally, the ratio of growing to non-growing follicles increases by age, which could confound the association between AMH and non-growing follicles in our study. However, despite these limitations, AMH is still considered the best of the available biomarkers of ovarian reserve in reproductive medicine based on good predictive value for number of oocytes retrieved by superovulation in assisted reproduction. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to compare serum AMH to histologically-determined non-growing follicle counts in human ovaries. Our study demonstrated a significant association between AMH and small growing follicle density. Considering the long follicle growth and maturation time, which is at least half a year in humans, the ability to predict the numbers of small growing follicles is very informative and valuable to reproductive medicine. Future studies in pregnant and non-pregnant population are needed to study the associations between AMH and cortical follicle densities further.

3.3.   Concentrations of chemicals in serum

We focused our chemical analyses on persistent contaminants because their levels are not affected by sampling and storage conditions, which we cannot control for when working with biobanked serum samples (n = 60). The occurrence and concentrations of altogether 31 contaminants were measured in serum covering lipophilic industrial chemicals restricted under the Stockholm Convention, and amphiphilic PFASs that are not yet as extensively regulated. Fourteen of the chemicals (45%) were detected in the serum of every woman, demonstrating that extensive mixture exposure to persistent industrial chemicals is common among pregnant women. PFASs were present in highest concentrations, followed by p,p’-DDE, HCB, PCBs, and PBDEs. The higher concentration of PFASs in serum is likely explained by their amphiphilic nature, which leads to accumulation mainly in blood and tissues such as liver. In the case of OCPs, PCBs, and PBDEs, although serum concentrations are lower, adipose tissue concentrations can be markedly higher, constituting an important reservoir. Compared to American women of similar age in the NHANES cohort, Swedish women were less exposed to certain OCPs and PBDEs. This suggests that unique exposure patterns may exist in populations, possibly due to several factors such as history of local fire safety regulations, type of products in commerce, ethnicity and diet. Nonetheless, women of reproductive age were still exposed to these persistent industrial chemicals in both countries. Most measured chemicals significantly correlated with each other except for PFHxA, PFHxS, PFHpA, PBDE 99, and p,p’-DDE. Strongest correlations were seen among similar substances, i.e., among PFAS and among PCBs. PFHxA, PFHxS, and PFHpA are shorter carbon chain and more recently produced to replace the legacy PFASs, which may explain the lack of association.

3.4.  Associations between chemicals and ovarian reserve

We next evaluated associations between chemical exposures and the size of ovarian reserve determined as serum AMH or follicle densities (i.e. primordial and unilaminar) in cortical tissue samples (n = 50). Chemicals were considered both individually and as mixtures using either the sum of chemical families (i.e. OCPs, PCBs, or PFASs) or WQS modelling due to the highly correlated exposure patterns. The models were adjusted for age, BMI and parity as these covariates are known to play a role in fertility and ovarian reserve. We first compared serum chemical concentrations between women who had follicles in their tissue samples and those who did not. There was significantly higher serum HCB (crude: | CS biopsy | NHANES | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X |               R.D. Bj¨orvang et al.                                                                                                                                 Environment International 155 (2021) 106589

                                                                                       Ovarian Reserve
                                                                                                                Unilaminar                                                             Atretic
                                                                      n=59                    n=50                   n=50                  n=50                    n=50                 n=50
                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                        **                                            #*
                                                                                                                        *#                                            *#
                                                                                                                        *                                              #
                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                        *##

                                                                                                                         #

                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                         #                                            #

                                                                                                                                                                              #
                                                                           #

                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                         #
                                 Lipophilic POP WQS (+)
                            Lipophilic POP WQS (+), LA
                                 Lipophilic POP WQS (-)                                           *                     *#
                            Lipophilic POP WQS (-), LA                                            #
                                                                               #

              Fig. 4. Association of chemical exposure (individual and mixture) with AMH and follicle densities. Dot shows β-estimate with 95% confidence interval (CI).
              Dashed vertical line corresponds to estimate = 0. Linear regression and weighted quantile sum (WQS) regression were adjusted for age, BMI, and parity. Outcomes
              and chemicals were log10-transformed. WQS analyzed for positive (+) and negative (-) associations. Unilaminar follicle density was comprised of primordial,
              intermediary, and primary follicles while growing follicle density was comprised of late primary and secondary. Healthy follicles were the total of unilaminar and
              growing follicles. Lipophilic chemicals were analyzed as crude concentrations (pg/mL) and lipid-adjusted (LA) concentrations (ng/g lipid). Lipophilic POP mixture
              consists of OCPs, PCBs, and PBDE 99. Only those chemicals that were above the limit of detection in more than half of the women were included. * indicated for p-
              value  < 0.05 while # for p-value between 0.05 and 0.1. Abbreviation: OCP – organochlorine pesticides; PCB – polychlorinated biphenyls; PBDE – polybrominated
              diphenyl ether; PFAS – perfluoroalkyl substances.

    Collectively, our data suggest that certain persistent contaminants in
serum may be associated with the size of ovarian reserve in women of
reproductive age. Specifically, a range of highly persistent OCPs and
several PCBs had significant or borderline significant association with
the density of unilaminar follicles in ovarian cortex but not associated
with growing follicles, serum AMH or atretic follicles. Lower density of
non-growing follicles could mean that there were fewer follicles to start
with, or more have undergone atresia. All ovarian follicles are formed
during fetal life, and the formation of the reserve during the first half of
gestation has been recognized as a sensitive window of development
during which chemical insults could impact post-natal reproductive
health and fertility (Buck Louis et al., 2013; Johansson et al., 2017).
Considering that the chemicals of concern in our data were in use in
Sweden until the 1970s, it is possible that the women in our cohort were
exposed already during early life by placental transfer through their
mothers (Bergman et al., 2013; Mamsen et al., 2019). Previous studies
have shown longer time-to-pregnancy in daughters whose mothers were
exposed to POPs (Cohn et al., 2011, 2003). However, we were not able
to determine the prenatal exposure profiles of the women in our cohort
and cannot test significance of early life exposure in our results.
     Due to their extreme persistency, lipophilic POPs are still detected in
Swedish populations and for example in the Baltic sea fish, which is a
component of the diet (Axmon et al., 2001, 2000). It is therefore likely
that the women in our cohort have been exposed to POPs through diet
throughout their post-natal life. This situation is not unique to Sweden.
Because POPs are present in fish and biomagnify in the food chain, fish-
consuming        populations       around     the   world     are   exposed.      The   lower
numbers of non-growing follicles could stem from faster atresia of
ovarian reserve in response to this exposure. In animal studies, pesti-
cides have been shown to increase follicle atresia in female rats and mice
(Vabre et al., 2017). Although we did not observe significant associa-
tions between serum POPs and atretic follicle density, it could be diluted
by small changes over decades of exposure. Interestingly, models pre-
dicting the size of ovarian reserve by age show good predictions up to

                                                                                                                8 Fig. 5. Association of lipophilic POP mixture with primordial (A) and unilaminar follicle densities (B) and weights of chemicals. Weighted quantile sum (WQS) regression was adjusted for age, BMI, and parity (n = 50). Lipophilic POP mixture consists of OCPs, PCBs, and PBDE 99. Results for non-LA chemicals are shown. Dashed vertical line indicates threshold for chemicals of concern in the mixture. Only those chemicals that were above the limit of detection in more than half of the women were included. Abbreviation: p,p’-DDE – dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene; LA – lipid-adjusted; OCPs – organochlorine pesticides; PBDE – polybrominated diphenyl ethers; PCB – polychlorinated biphenyls.

the age of 25 years, after which the variation in the models increase. It is possible that the cumulative exposure to environmental factors such as POPs may leads to increasing variation in ageing women.

Chemical mixtures present a challenge to chemical health risk assessment. It is well known that humans are exposed to mixtures of chemicals, and combination effects may occur. While combination effects can be demonstrated in controlled experimental settings, estimation of combinatory toxicity of chemicals in humans is very difficult because of the possible additive, synergistic, or antagonistic properties of chemicals in a mixture and the impracticality of measuring all chemicals present in a sample. Multiple statistical models have been developed, and there is continuous effort on optimizing these approaches. Due to extensive variability between the models, there is no single approach that performs the best. Here, we employed two models: 1) an additive approach; and 2) one that assigns weights to chemicals based on their association to an outcome as a part of a mixture. In agreement with the single chemical analyses we carried out, associations were found only in the case of lipophilic POPs and only to non-growing follicle densities. However, the suspect chemicals in the mixtures differed from the single chemical analyses. This could suggest certain chemicals (PBDE 99, PCB 187 and p,p’-DDE in this case) are more harmful when co-occurring. While it is acknowledged that methods for chemical mixture risk assessment need to be developed further, our data suggest that mixtures of chemicals associate to size of the ovarian reserve in women. The connection between lipophilic POPs and smaller ovarian reserve could imply higher odds for infertility and early reproductive senescence.

3.5. Chemical exposure and infertility

Multiple population studies have found evidence for associations between POP exposure and infertility and/or early menopause. Infertility is commonly determined as TTP > 12 months, and it is important to note that this is not equivalent to sterility. Women classified as infertile by the WHO definition could still conceive. We analyzed association between chemicals, chemical mixtures and odds for infertility using 12 months as the cut-off in our cohort. Median of TTP in years was 0, with a minimum of 0 and maximum of 10 years. Out of 55 women in the analyses, 13 were classified as infertile using this definition, but still achieved pregnancy in the end. Exposure to p,p’-DDE had a positive association with odds for infertility, both as crude (OR 6.7; 95% CI 1.1, 40; p = 0.04) and when LA (OR 7.7; 95% CI 1.2, 49; p = 0.03). In addition, LA HCB also was positively associated to odds for infertility (OR 54; 95% CI 1.1, 2300; p = 0.04). The analyses were also suggestive of possible associations for transnonachlor (crude OR 7.8; 95% CI 0.87, 69; p = 0.07 and LA OR 10; 95% CI 0.96, 110; p = 0.054), PCB 99 (crude OR 8.2; 95% CI 0.72, 92; p = 0.09 and LA OR 11; 95% CI 0.83, 160; p = 0.07) and PCB 183 (LA OR 26; 95% CI 0.77, 900; p = 0.07).

When mixtures were considered as sums of chemicals, significant positive associations were seen between sum of OCPs and odds for infertility both crude (OR 2.6; 95% CI 1.1, 6.2; p = 0.04) and when LA (OR 2.8; 95% CI 1.1, 7.1; p = 0.03). None of the mixture through WQS modelling was significant.

Collectively, our cohort confirms the often-reported association between infertility (TTP > 12 months) and exposure to organochlorine chemicals in humans. Our study further suggests that the size of ovarian reserve could be a mediator of this association. The results encourage to study the impact of chemicals on formation of ovarian reserve during fetal life and on consumption of the reserve in adulthood in more detail.

## Strengths and limitations

This study had several strengths. Ovarian reserve was measured both directly and indirectly. In addition to analyzing serum AMH, we had the unique opportunity to collect ovarian tissue samples to directly determine the ovarian reserve by histological quantification of follicles in reproductive-aged women. This also allowed us to evaluate the value of AMH as a biomarker of ovarian reserve. Moreover, we assessed an

| Chemical Exposure | Odds Ratio (OR) | 95% Confidence Interval (CI) | p-value |
|-------------------|------------------|------------------------------|---------|
| p,p’-DDE (crude)  | 6.7              | 1.1, 40                      | 0.04    |
| p,p’-DDE (LA)     | 7.7              | 1.2, 49                      | 0.03    |
| LA HCB            | 54               | 1.1, 2300                    | 0.04    |
| transnonachlor (crude) | 7.8         | 0.87, 69                     | 0.07    |
| transnonachlor (LA) | 10             | 0.96, 110                    | 0.054   |
| PCB 99 (crude)    | 8.2              | 0.72, 92                     | 0.09    |
| PCB 99 (LA)       | 11               | 0.83, 160                    | 0.07    |
| PCB 183 (LA)      | 26               | 0.77, 900                    | 0.07    |
| Sum of OCPs (crude) | 2.6            | 1.1, 6.2                     | 0.04    |
| Sum of OCPs (LA)  | 2.8              | 1.1, 7.1                     | 0.03    | extensive spectrum of POPs, both individually and as a mixture, in relation to AMH and follicle densities. Although there are several approaches in assessing chemical mixture with continuous discussions on optimizing these approaches, there is no single best method that outperforms the others. Hence, we utilized two methods in analyzing mixtures, both as a sum and through WQS modelling.

There were also limitations in this study. Because follicles are randomly distributed in the cortex, the ovarian tissue samples may or may not contain follicles. The tissue size, small as it may seem relative to the ovary, is the closest representation we can get from reproductive-aged women. The cohort was comprised of pregnant women, and therefore, may have a different biological picture compared to non-pregnant women. In addition, even if some women were classified as infertile, they all conceived in the end. Therefore, the associations between chemicals, ovarian reserve and infertility could change if tested in a random sample of women. Moreover, the serum samples were taken during the first trimester while the biopsied ovarian tissue samples were collected upon delivery. In addition, it is important to emphasize that the size of our cohort was relatively small and full data were available only for 50 of the included 145 women. Moreover, we focused only on a small fraction of industrial chemicals in use. Larger studies will have higher statistical power to test our findings. Lastly, this study only allowed us to test associations, but not causal inferences.

## Conclusions

Overall, our analysis of chemicals, AMH and ovarian cortical follicle densities in a cohort of women undergoing planned delivery by elective caesarean section is unique. Despite the very central role of healthy ovarian follicles in determining fertility and reproductive health in women, no other published study has examined associations between toxic environmental chemicals, and both direct and indirect measurement of ovarian reserve in humans. As a comparison, there are multiple studies spanning over several decades dissecting associations between environmental chemicals and sperm count in men. Similarly, exposure to endocrine-disrupting chemicals has been hypothesized to disrupt the development of female reproductive tract leading to ovarian dysfunction and infertility in adulthood. Our study strongly encourages to develop this hypothesis further. In particular, the impact of lipophilic POPs on the formation of the ovarian reserve should be the focus of future studies. Furthermore, the effects of life-long exposure on the depletion of the reserve in adulthood should be mapped. Finally, this study confirms that POPs affect female fertility in humans and displays the urgency for revisiting regulations of these already banned chemicals that still contaminate our food stock. R.D. Björvang et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106589

Cohn, B.A., Cirillo, P.M., Wolff, M.S., Schwingl, P.J., Cohen, R.D., Sholtz, R.I., Ferrara, A., Christianson, R.E., van den Berg, B.J., Siiteri, P.K., 2003. DDT and DDE exposure in mothers and time to pregnancy in daughters. Lancet 361, 2205–2206.

Conforti, A., Mascia, M., Cioffi, G., de Angelis, C., Coppola, G., de Rosa, P., Pivonello, R., Alviggi, C., de Placido, G., 2018. Air pollution and female fertility: a systematic review of literature. Reproductive Biology and Endocrinology 16, 1–9.

Crain, D.A., Janssen, S.J., Edwards, T.M., Heindel, J., Ho, S.-M., Hunt, P., Iguchi, T., Juul, A., Mclachlan, J.A., Schwartz, J., Skakkebaek, N., Soto, A.M., Swan, S., Walker, C., Woodruff, T.K., Woodruff, T.J., Giudice, L.C., Guillette, L.J., 2008. Female reproductive disorders: the roles of endocrine-disrupting compounds and developmental timing. Fertil. Steril. 90, 911–940.

Czarnota, J., Gennings, C., Wheeler, D.C., 2015. Assessment of weighted quantile sum regression for modeling chemical mixtures and cancer risk. Cancer Inf. 14, 159–171.

Monniaux, Danielle, Clement, Frederique, Dalbies-Tran, Rozenn, Estienne, Anthony, Fabre, Stephane, Mansanet, Camille, Monget, Philippe, 2014. The Ovarian Reserve of Primordial Follicles and the Dynamic Reserve of Antral Growing Follicles: What Is the Link? Biol. Reprod. 90, 1–11.

Desforges, J.-P., Hall, A., Mcconnell, B., Rosing-Asvid, A., Barber, J.L., Brownlow, A., de Guise, S., Eulaers, I., Jepson, P.D., Letcher, R.J., Levin, M., Ross, P.S., Samarra, F., Víkingson, G., Sonne, C., Dietz, R., 2018. Predicting global killer whale population collapse from PCB pollution. Science 361, 1373–1376.

di Renzo, G.C., Conry, J.A., Blake, J., Defrancesco, M.S., Denicola, N., Martin, J.N., Mccue, K.A., Richmond, D., Shah, A., Sutton, P., Woodruff, T.J., Ziemin Van Der Poel, S., Giudice, L.C., 2015. International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) Opinion on Reproductive Health Impacts of Exposure to Toxic Environmental Chemicals. International Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics 131, 219–225.

Drakvik, E., Altenburger, R., Aoki, Y., Backhaus, T., Bahadori, T., Barouki, R., Brack, W., Cronin, M.T.D., Demeneix, B., Hougaard Bennekou, S., van Klaveren, J., Kneuer, C., Kolossa-Gehring, M., Lebret, E., Posthuma, L., Reiber, L., Rider, C., Rüegg, J., Testa, G., van der Burg, B., van der Voet, H., Warhurst, A.M., van de Water, B., Yamazaki, K., Oberg, M., Bergman, Å., 2020. Statement on advancing the assessment of chemical mixtures and their risks for human health and the environment. Environ. Int.

Fei, C., Mclaughlin, J.K., Lipworth, L., Olsen, J., 2009. Maternal levels of perfluorinated chemicals and subfecundity. Hum. Reprod. 24, 1200–1205.

Forsthuber, M., Kaiser, A.M., Granitzer, S., Hassl, I., Hengstschläger, M., Stangl, H., Gundacker, C., 2020. Albumin is the major carrier protein for PFOS, PFOA, PFHxS, PFNA and PFDA in human plasma. Environ. Int. 137.

Freeman, J.R., Whitcomb, B.W., Roy, A., Bertone-Johnson, E.R., Reich, N.G., Healy, A.J., House, A., 2018. A pilot longitudinal study of anti-Müllerian hormone levels throughout gestation in low risk pregnancy. Health Sci Rep 1, e53.

Gesink Law, D.C., Klebanoff, M.A., Brock, J.W., Dunson, D.B., Longnecker, M.P., 2005. Maternal serum levels of polychlorinated biphenyls and 1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethylene (DDE) and time to pregnancy. Am. J. Epidemiol. 162, 523–532.

Gold, E.B., 2011. The Timing of the Age at Which Natural Menopause Occurs. Obstet. Gynecol. Clin. North Am. 38, 425–440.

Gore, A.C., Chappell, V.A., Fenton, S.E., Flaws, J.A., Nadal, A., Prins, G.S., Toppari, J., Zoeller, R.T., 2015. EDC-2: The Endocrine Society’s Second Scientific Statement on Endocrine-disrupting Chemicals. Endocr. Rev. 36, E1–E150.

Gougeon, A., 2013. The early stages of follicular growth. In: Trounson, A., Gosden, R., Eichenlaub-Ritter, U. (Eds.), Biology and Pathology of the Oocyte. Cambridge University Press, pp. 50–61.

Gougeon, A., 2010. Human ovarian follicular development: From activation of resting follicles to preovulatory maturation. Annales d’Endocrinologie 71, 132–143.

Gougeon, A., 1996. Regulation of Ovarian Follicular Development in Primates: Facts and Hypotheses. Endocr. Rev. 17, 121–155.

Gougeon, A., Chainy, G.B.N., 1987. Morphometric studies of small follicles in ovaries of women at different ages. J. Reprod. Fertil. 81, 433–442.

Grindler, N.M., Allsworth, J.E., Macones, G.A., Kannan, K., Roehl, K.A., Cooper, A.R., 2015. Persistent organic pollutants and early menopause in U.S. women. PLoS ONE 10, 1–12.

Habbema, J.D.F., Collins, J., Evers, J.L.H., Lunenfeld, B., TeVelde, E.R., 2004. Towards less confusing terminology in reproductive medicine: a proposal. Hum. Reprod. 19, 1497–1501.

Hansen, K.R., Craig, L.B., Zavy, M.T., Klein, N.A., Soules, M.R., 2012. Ovarian Primordial and Non-Growing Follicle Counts According to the Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop (STRAW) Staging System. Menopause 19, 164–171.

Harley, K.G., Marks, A.R., Bradman, A., Barr, D.B., Eskenazi, B., 2008. DDT exposure, work in agriculture, and time to pregnancy among farmworkers in California. Journal of occupational and environmental medicine / American College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine 50, 1335–1342.

Hawkins Bressler, L., Steiner, A., 2018. Anti-Müllerian hormone as a predictor of reproductive potential. Curr. Opin. Endocrinol. Diabetes Obes. 25, 385–390.

Hunt, P.A., Sathyanarayana, S., Fowler, P.A., Trasande, L., 2016. Female Reproductive Disorders, Diseases, and Costs of Exposure to Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals in the European Union. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 101, 1562–1570.

Johansson, H.K.L., Svingen, T., Fowler, P.A., Vinggaard, A.M., Boberg, J., 2017. Environmental influences on ovarian dysgenesis — developmental windows sensitive to chemical exposures. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 13, 400–414.

Johnson, P.I., Altshul, L., Cramer, D.W., Missmer, S.A., Hauser, R., Meeker, J.D., 2012. Serum and follicular fluid concentrations of polybrominated diphenyl ethers and in-vitro fertilization outcome. Environ. Int. 45, 9–14.

Kahn, L.G., Philippat, C., Nakayama, S.F., Slama, R., Trasande, L., 2020. Endocrine-disrupting chemicals: implications for human health. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinology 8, 718.

Kassambara, A., 2017. ggpubr: “ggplot2” Based Publication Ready Plots. R package version (1), 6.

Koponen, J., Rantakokko, P., Airaksinen, R., Kiviranta, H., 2013. Determination of selected perfluorinated alkyl acids and persistent organic pollutants from a small volume human serum sample relevant for epidemiological studies. J. Chromatogr. A 1309, 48–55.

Kortenkamp, A., 2007. Ten Years of Mixing Cocktails: A Review of Combination Effects of Endocrine-Disrupting Chemicals. Environ. Health Perspect. 115, 98–105.

Kwok, R., Johnson, N.P., 2012. Ovarian biopsy has no role as a routine diagnostic test of ovarian reserve: a systematic review. Reproductive BioMedicine Online 24, 492–495.

Köninger, A., Kampmeier, A., Schmidt, B., Frank, M., Strowitzki, T., Kimmig, R., Gellhaus, A., Mach, P., 2018. Trends in anti-Müllerian hormone concentrations across different stages of pregnancy in women with polycystic ovary syndrome. Reproductive BioMedicine Online 37, 367–374.

La Marca, A., Sunkara, S.K., 2014. Individualization of controlled ovarian stimulation in IVF using ovarian reserve markers: from theory to practice. Human Reproduction Update 20, 124–140.

Lass, A., Silye, R., Abrams, D.-C., Krausz, T., Hovatta, O., Margara, R., Winston, R.M.L., 1997. Follicular density in ovarian biopsy of infertile women: a novel method to assess ovarian reserve. Hum. Reprod. 12, 1028–1031.

Lindh, C.H., Rylander, L., Toft, G., Axmon, A., Rignell-Hydbom, A., Giwercman, A., Pedersen, H.S., Gołaczyk, K., Ludwicki, J.K., Zvyezday, V., Vermeulen, R., Lenters, V., Heederik, D., Bonde, J.P., Jönsson, B.A.G., 2012. Blood serum concentrations of perfluorinated compounds in men from Greenlandic Inuit and European populations. Chemosphere 88, 1269–1275.

Li, Y., Fletcher, T., Mucs, D., Scott, K., Lindh, C.H., Tallving, P., Jakobsson, K., 2018. Half-lives of PFOS, PFHxS and PFOA after end of exposure to contaminated drinking water. Occup. Environ. Med. 75, 46–51.

Lumley, T., 2013. dichromat. Color Schemes for Dichromats.

Mamsen, L.S., Björvang, R.D., Mucs, D., Vinnars, M.-T., Papadogiannakis, N., Lindh, C.H., Andersen, C.Y., Damdimopoulou, P., 2019. Concentrations of perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) in human embryonic and fetal organs from first, second, and third trimester pregnancies. Environ. Int. 124.

Martin, O., Scholze, M., Ermler, S., McPhie, J., Bopp, S.K., Kienzler, A., Parissis, N., Kortenkamp, A., 2021. Ten years of research on synergisms and antagonisms in chemical mixtures: A systematic review and quantitative reappraisal of mixture studies. Environ. Int. 146, 160–4120.

Moini, A., Hedayatshodeh, M., Hosseini, R., Rastad, H., 2016. Association between parity and ovarian reserve in reproductive age women. European J. Obstetrics & Gynecology and Reproductive Biology 207, 184–187.

Moslehi, N., Shab-Bidar, S., Ramezani Tehrani, F., Mirmiran, P., Azizi, F., 2018. Is ovarian reserve associated with body mass index and obesity in reproductive aged women? A meta-analysis. Menopause 25, 1046–1055.

Mustieles, V., Arrebola, J.P., 2020. How polluted is your fat? What the study of adipose tissue can contribute to environmental epidemiology. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 74, 401–407.

Pan, W., Ye, X., Yin, S., Ma, X., Li, C., Zhou, J., Liu, W., Liu, J., 2019. Selected persistent organic pollutants associated with the risk of primary ovarian insufficiency in women. Environ. Int. 129, 51–58.

Petro, E.M.L., Leroy, J.L.M.R., Covaci, A., Fransen, E., de Neubourg, D., Dirtu, A.C., de Pauw, I., Bols, P.E.J., 2012. Endocrine-disrupting chemicals in human follicular fluid impair in vitro oocyte developmental competence. Hum. Reprod. 27, 1025–1033.

R Core Team, 2018. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.

Renzetti, S., Curtin, P., Just, A.C., Bello, G., Gennings, C., 2018. gWQS: Generalized Weighted Quantile Sum Regression.

RStudio Team, 2016. RStudio: Integrated Development Environment for R. RStudio Inc, Boston, MA. R.D. Björvang et al.                                                               Environment International 155 (2021) 106589

| Author(s) | Year | Title | Journal | Volume | Pages | DOI |
|-----------|------|-------|---------|--------|-------|-----|
| Schmidt, K.L.T., Byskov, A.G., Andersen, A.N., Müller, J., Andersen, C.Y. | 2003 | Density and distribution of primordial follicles in single pieces of cortex from 21 patients and in individual pieces of cortex from three entire human ovaries | Hum. Reprod. | 18 | 1158–1164 | https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/deg246 |
| Secretariat of the Stockholm Convention | 2008 | Stockholm Convention Overview | - | - | - | http://www.pops.int/TheConvention/Overview/tabid/3351/Default.aspx |
| Segal, T.R., Giudice, L.C. | 2019 | Before the beginning: environmental exposures and reproductive and obstetrical outcomes | Fertilit and Sterility | 112 | 613–621 | https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2019.08.001 |
| Skakkebaek, N.E. | 2002 | Endocrine Disrupters and Testicular Dysgenesis Syndrome | Horm. Res. | 57 | 43 | https://doi.org/10.1159/000058100 |
| Taylor, K.W., Joubert, B.R., Braun, J.M., Dilworth, C., Gennings, C., Hauser, R., Heindel, J.J., Rider, C. v, Webster, T.F., Carlin, D.J. | 2016 | Statistical Approaches for Assessing Health Effects of Environmental Chemical Mixtures in Epidemiology: Lessons from an Innovative Workshop | Environ Health Perspect | 124 | A227-9 | https://doi.org/EHP547 |
| Trudel, D., Scheringer, M., von Goetz, N., Hungerb€, K. | 2011 | Total Consumer Exposure to Polybrominated Diphenyl Ethers in North America and Europe | Environ. Sci. Technol. | 45 | 2391–2397 | https://doi.org/10.1021/es1035046 |
| Vabre, P., Gatimel, N., Moreau, J., Gayrard, V., Picard-Hagen, N., Parinaud, J., Leandri, R.D. | 2017 | Environmental pollutants, a possible etiology for premature ovarian insufficiency: a narrative review of animal and human data | Environmental Health | 16 | - | https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-017-0242-4 |
| van Buuren, S., Groothuis-Oudshoorn, K. | 2011 | mice: Multivariate Imputation by Chained Equations in R | J. Stat. Softw. | 45 | 1–67 | - |
| van Kasteren, Y.M., Schoemaker, J. | 1999 | Premature ovarian failure: a systematic review on therapeutic interventions to restore ovarian function and achieve pregnancy | Human Reproduction Update | 5 | 483–492 | https://doi.org/10.1093/humupd/5.5.483 |
| Wallace, W., Kelsey, T.W. | 2010 | Human Ovarian Reserve from Conception to the Menopause | PLoS ONE | 5 | 8772 | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0008772 |
| Wang, Z., Walker, G.W., Muir, D.C.G., Nagatani-Yoshida, K. | 2020 | Toward a Global Understanding of Chemical Pollution: A First Comprehensive Analysis of National and Regional Chemical Inventories | Environ. Sci. Technol. | 54 | 2575–2584 | https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.9b06379 |
| Wickham, H. | 2009 | ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis | - | - | - | - |
| Wickham, H. | 2007 | Reshaping Data with the reshape Package | J. Stat. Softw. | 21 | 1–20 | https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v021.i12 |
| World Health Organization | 2019 | Infertility is a global public health issue | - | - | - | https://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/topics/infertility/perspective/en/ |
| Younglai, E. v., Holloway, A.C., Foster, W.G. | 2005 | Environmental and occupational factors affecting fertility and IVF success | Human Reproduction Update | 11 | 43–57 | https://doi.org/10.1093/humupd/dmh055 |
| Zhang, X., Han, T., Yan, L., Jiao, X., Qin, Y., Chen, Z.-J. | 2019 | Resumption of Ovarian Function After Ovarian Biopsy/Scratch in Patients With Premature Ovarian Insufficiency | Reproductive Sciences | 26 | 207–213 | https://doi.org/10.1177/1933719118818906 |
| Zhang, Y., Mustieles, V., Williams, P.L., Wylie, B.J., Souter, I., Calafat, A.M., Demokritou, M., Lee, A., Vagios, S., Hauser, R., Messerlian, C. | 2021 | Parental preconception exposure to phenol and phthalate mixtures and the risk of preterm birth | Environ. Int. | 151 | 160–4120 | https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2021.106440 | 