# Succession of marine bacteria in response to Ulva prolifera-derived dissolved organic matter

## A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Bacterial community succession
Green algal bloom
Dissolved organic matter
Vibrio
Microcosm

Increasing macroalgal blooms as a consequence of climate warming and coastal eutrophication have profound effects on the marine environment. The outbreaks of Ulva prolifera in the Yellow Sea of China occurring every summer since 2007 to present have formed the world’s largest green tide. The green tide releases huge amounts of dissolved organic matter (DOM) to the seawater, causing an organic overload. However, how marine bacteria respond to this issue and the potential impact on the marine environment are still unclear. Here, we monitored the highly temporally resolved dynamics of marine bacterial community that occur in response to Ulva prolifera-derived DOM by performing a 168-h microcosm incubation experiment. DOM inputs significantly increased bacterial abundances within 6 h, decreased bacterial diversity and triggered clear community successions during the whole period of incubation. Vibrio of Gammaproteobacteria robustly and rapidly grew over short timescales (6–24 h), with its relative abundance accounting for up to 52.5% of active bacteria. From 24 to 48 h, some genera of Flavobacteriia grew rapidly, which was more conspicuous at a higher DOM concentration than at a lower concentration. The genus Donghicola of Alphaproteobacteria was predominant at later time points (>48 h). This bacterial community succession was accompanied by significant variations in the activity of 12 different extracellular enzymes, resulting in a rapid reduction of dissolved organic carbon by 74.5% within the first 36 h. In summary, our study demonstrates rapid successions of bacterial community and extracellular enzyme activity after DOM inputs, suggesting that the bacterial response to Ulva prolifera-derived organic matter may contribute to environmental restoration and may pose a health threat due to the bloom of potential pathogenic Vibrio.

## 1. Introduction

Ulva prolifera, one of the most common green algae, is widely distributed in the marine environment. Due to seawater eutrophication, the world’s largest green tide mainly caused by U. prolifera has occurred regularly since 2007 in the Yellow Sea of China. During the bloom, millions of tons of the macroalgal biomass float on the sea surface, with the recorded maximum distribution area of 57,384 km2, larger than any cases ever reported in the world. This type of opportunistic alga undergoes “boom and bust” cycles by rapidly expanding their populations under eutrophic conditions and dying off when nutrient resources are exhausted. During growth, algae excrete dissolved organic matter (DOM) to the surrounding seawater, and more importantly, a large amount of DOM is released following cell death caused by environmental stress (e.g., high temperature and limited nutrients) as well as viral lysis at the extinction phase of bloom. The concentration of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in seawater during U. prolifera bloom reaches a high value up to 1000 μM. Microbial consumption of algal-derived DOM would result in decrease of pH and dissolved oxygen (DO), thus causing severe environmental problems. On the other hand, heterotrophic bacteria, as the most abundant decomposers, can mediate the degradation and transformation of DOM, playing a positive role. J. Liang et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106687

role in marine environmental improvement.
The question of whether and how bacterial community composition changes in response to U. prolifera blooms has been investigated in field studies. However, outcomes of these studies have differed. For example, it was found that Desulfovibrio-related phylotypes dominated the seawater covered with massive macroalgal canopies of U. prolifera, whereas pond water with U. prolifera was populated by Actinomycetales. One explanation for the discrepancy could be due to varying DOM compositions released across different bloom periods. Moreover, the blooms of U. prolifera are usually transient, unpredictable and random, which generally float on the sea surface and are easily affected by ocean currents and human activities. These factors influence our choices of appropriate temporal and spatial scales to examine microbial community succession, and increase the complexity for in situ characterization of the microbial response to algal-derived DOM. Therefore, studies of microbial DOM degradation have mostly been carried out using experimental or microcosm incubations.
Algal-derived DOM is complex in chemical components, consisting of diverse low-molecular-weight (LMW) (oligosaccharides, amino acids, etc.) and high-molecular-weight (HMW) substances (e.g., polysaccharides). The LMW fraction can be readily used by microorganisms, whereas the HMW substrates need to be degraded into small molecules by structurally selective extracellular enzymes secreted by microorganisms before uptake. Thus, DOM compositions may regulate bacterial assemblages, making their response to algal blooms much complex. Bacteria indeed have evolved several different metabolic ways of DOM utilization in terms of extracellular enzyme production and direct substrate uptake, and extracellular enzymatic activity has been considered as an important index indicating how bacteria utilize HMW substrates. However, in contrast to an extensive characterization of changes in bacterial community following algal DOM, much less is known about the mechanism underlying microbial DOM utilization, especially that derived from macroalgae. A previous report on bacterial response to microalgal bloom has shown taxonomically distinct expression patterns of carbohydrate-active enzymes at different bloom stages.
In this study, the response of a marine bacterial community to U. prolifera-derived DOM was investigated using a microcosm approach at a high temporal resolution (10 samplings within 168 h). To prevent the possible influence exerted by phytoplankton, the microcosm was conducted in darkness. Succession and activity of the bacterial community in response to DOM inputs were characterized by plate counting, qPCR, high-throughput amplicon sequencing and examination of 12 different extracellular enzyme activities (targeting polysaccharides, lipids and proteins). Our study generated a detailed look at the response order and time of different bacterial clades to U. prolifera-derived DOM, and would increase our understanding of the environmental impact exerted by algal bloom.
For preparation of the macroalga-derived DOM, fresh alga (Ulva prolifera) was collected from the surface seawater of Qingdao coast (Yellow Sea, China) during the bloom period of U. prolifera in June 2018. Impurities on the U. prolifera surface were washed out with sterilized saline. The U. prolifera was homogenized by grinding with liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle, and then 500 ml of saline solution (0.85% NaCl, w/v) was added and mixed thoroughly. The homogenate was centrifuged and sequentially filtered through a pre-combusted (550 ◦C for 6 h) GF/F filter (Whatman, Maidstone, UK, 47 mm diameter) and an acid-washed, Milli-Q-rinsed 0.22-μm pore-size polycarbonate membrane (Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA, 47 mm in diameter). The filtrate was kept in acid-washed, Milli-Q-rinsed glass bottles and stored at -20 ◦C until use.

## 2.2. Microcosm experiments

The concentrations of DOC in seawater during the U. prolifera bloom are variable and can be up to 1000 μM. Therefore, two treatment groups that reflect the bloom degree of U. prolifera with different DOM concentrations were set up. The final mixing ratios of U. prolifera-derived DOM and seawater were 1:1000 and 1:200 (v/v) in the DOM-treated 1 (T1) and DOM-treated 2 (T2) groups, respectively. To ensure that organic carbon was the limiting factor for bacterial growth, excess inorganic nutrients (192 μM NO3 + NO2, 20 μM NH4+ and 24 μM PO43) were supplied to the T1 and T2 groups. Two control microcosms were established which included natural seawater (C1) and seawater amendment with nutrients (C2) to determine the influence of excess inorganic nutrients. The final volume of all four groups was ~20 L.
The cultures were set up in 20-L polycarbonate carboys with three holes in the lid that were connected with three pre-acid-washed and sterilized PTFE tubes (intake pipe, outlet pipe, and sampling pipe). The intake pipe and sampling pipe were extended to the bottom of the carboy, and the outlet pipe was above the water surface. The carboys were wrapped by black plastic films to exclude the influence of light on the experiment. The cultures were bubbled with filter-sterilized air and incubated at room temperature (~25◦C). Triplicate cultures were performed in three individual carboys for all four groups.

## 2.3. Abundance of culturable bacteria and Vibrio

Samples were taken with glass syringes connected with a luer lock to PTFE tubes. This system allowed us to sample without opening the containers. Glass syringes were rinsed with the microcosm water prior to sampling. Samples were collected at 0 h, 6 h, 12 h, 24 h, 36 h, 48 h, 72 h, 96 h, 120 h, 144 h, and 168 h. The samples were serially diluted (10^1–10^6) as required, and triplicate 0.1 ml of samples for each dilution were spread on the marine agar (MA, for heterotrophic bacteria) and thiosulfate-citrate-bile salt-sucrose agar (TCBS, for Vibrio) plates and were incubated at 28 ◦C for two days. The number of colony-forming units (CFUs) on each plate was counted.

## 2.4. Extracellular enzyme activity

Seawater for microcosm incubation was collected from the seaside of Qingdao, Shandong Province, China, at dawn on 2 September 2018. Approximately 260 L of seawater was prefiltered by a 200-μm filter net and then transferred to pre-acid-washed, sample water-rinsed 20-L polycarbonate bottles. Physicochemical parameters, including temperature, salinity, DO, pH, conductivity and total dissolved solids (TDS), were measured in situ using a YSI Multiparameter Instrument.
Twelve extracellular enzyme activities, including those of saccharide hydrolase, protease, phosphatase and lipase, were determined at the same time points as CFU counting according to the method described by Hoppe. Extracellular enzyme activity was measured as an increase in the fluorescence of the product 4-methylumbelliferone (MUF: excitation and emission: 365 and 440 nm, respectively) or 4-methylcoumarinyl-7-amide (MCA: excitation and emission: 372 and 445 nm, respectively) released after enzymatic hydrolysis of the nonfluorescent substrate using a microplate fluorometer and luminometer. Twelve model fluorogenic substrates, including MUF- | Original Seawater | Control | Control 2 | Treated | Treated 2 |
|--------------------|---------|-----------|---------|-----------|
| Seawater           | Seawater| Seawater  | Seawater| Seawater  |
| Excess N&P         | Excess N&P | Excess N&P | Low DOM | High DOM |
| Each treatment was performed in three individual carboys in dark at RT (Sample at 6, 12, 24, 36, 48h, after every 24h up to 168h) | | | | |
| Measure            | Measure | Enumberate | Enumberate | Enumberate | Illumina |
| DOC                | Exoenzymatic activity | CB & CV by plate coating | TB & TV by qPCR | AB & AV by RT-qPCR | sequencing |

A schematic flow chart of the experimental design used to establish microcosms. Four incubations were set up. During the incubation, we monitored the changes in DOC, extracellular enzyme activity, the abundances of culturable bacteria (CB), culturable Vibrio (CV), total bacteria (TB), total Vibrio (TV), active bacteria (AB) and active Vibrio (AV); and variation in the bacterial community composition. Triplicate cultures were performed in three individual carboys for each group.

α-glucopyranoside (for α-glucosidase), MUF-β-glucopyranoside (for β-glucosidase), MUF-β-D-xylopyranoside (for β-xylosidase), MUF-α-D-mannopyranoside (for mannosidase), MUF-N-acetyl-β-D-galactosaminide (for galactosaminidase), MCA-leucine (for aminopeptidase), MUF-butyrate (for lipase), MUF-phosphate (for phosphatase), MUF-N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminide (for N-acetyl-glucosaminidase), MUF-α-L-arabinofuranoside (for arabinofuranosidase), MUF-sulfate potassium salt (for sulfatase), MUF-β-D-N,N′,N′′-triacetylchitotrioside (for chitotriosidase) were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) to prepare a 20 mM stock solution. Triplicate 100 μL of seawater samples were dispensed into 96-well Costar® assay plates (Corning, USA) to which 10 μL of the substrate stock solution was added, reaching a final concentration of 20 μM. Fluorescence signals released by the degraded substrates were read every 2 min over a period of 1 h. The exoenzymatic activity was calculated using the fluorescence values that changed linearly with time. The standard curve was generated with serially diluted MUF and MCA stock solutions (0–20 μM).

Samples of all four groups at 0 h, 12 h, 24 h, 36 h, 48 h, 72 h, 96 h, 120 h, 144 h and 168 h were selected for DNA analysis. Total DNA was extracted using the DNeasy® PowerSoil® Kit (QIAGEN, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions. DNA quantity was evaluated using a Nanodrop-2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Corp., USA). Samples of C2 and T2 at 0 h, 12 h, 24 h, 48 h, 72 h, and 144 h were selected for RNA analysis. Total RNA was extracted using the Direct-zol™ RNA MiniPrep (Zymo Research, USA) with minor modifications to improve the recovery of RNA from filters. Briefly, filters were thawed on ice, and RNAlater™ was expelled via syringe and discarded. Each filter was cut into pieces under sterilized RNase-free conditions and placed into a sterilized 2-ml bead tube containing 1 ml of 65 ◦C-preheated Tri-reagent (Sigma, USA). A Fast Prep-24 Homogenization System (MP Biomedicals, Irvine, CA) was used at a speed of 6.0 m s 1 to aid cell lysis. After centrifugation at 15,000g for 2 min, the supernatant was transferred into new RNase-free tubes. RNA purification was performed using the standard Direct-zol™ RNA MiniPrep protocol.

Nine μL of purified RNA was converted to cDNA using the SuperScript® III First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Synthesized cDNA was used for subsequent PCR amplification. The RNA samples were used as negative controls to exclude DNA contamination. The cDNA samples were stored at -80◦C until use. 2.7. Quantification of total and active bacteria and Vibrio

Abundances of the total (DNA based) and active (RNA based) bacteria and Vibrio were quantified using a quantitative PCR (qPCR) method and a LightCycler® 480 Real-Time System (Roche, Germany). The abundance of total bacteria was quantified with the primer set A-967F (5′-CAACGCGAAGAACCTTACC-3)/B-1046R ′ (5′-CGACAGCCATGCAN CACCT-3′). To specifically target Vibrio, the primer sets 567F (5′-GGCGTAAAGCGCATGCAGGT-3)/680R ′ (5′-GAAATTC-TACCCCCCTCTACAG-3′) were used to amplify a partial 16S rRNA gene. All qPCRs were performed in triplicate in a 20-μL reaction system containing 10 μL of SYBR Green Real-time PCR Master Mix (TaKaRa, Tokyo, Japan), 0.2 μM (for bacteria) or 0.4 μM (for Vibrio) of each primer, 2 μL of diluted (1:10) template DNA or cDNA and double-distilled water added up to 20 μL. The PCR conditions referred to the primer designers. Clones with bacterial and Vibrio 16S rRNA genes were used for construction of the standard curve. The qPCR amplification efficiencies were always between 95% and 105%, with R2 values > 0.99.

2.8. Illumina sequencing and data analysis

All the DNA and cDNA samples were processed for bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequencing. The DNA and RNA-derived cDNA samples were indicative of the total and active bacterial communities, respectively. The hypervariable V4 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene was amplified from DNA and cDNA samples using the primer set 515FmodF (5′-GTGYCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA-3)/806RmodR ′ (5′-GGACTACNVGGG TWTCTAAT-3′). Coverage of this primer set is 92.8% if one mismatch is allowed, calculated by the Silva TestPrime against the Silva (SSU138) 16S rRNA gene database. Each 20-μL reaction solution contained 4 μL of 5 × FastPfu Buffer, 2 μL of 2.5 mM dNTPs, 0.4 μM of each primer, 0.4 μL of FastPfu Polymerase, 0.2 μL of BSA (bovine serum albumin), and 10 ng of template DNA or cDNA. The PCR amplification was performed as follows: initial denaturation at 95 ℃ for 3 min, followed by 30 cycles consisting of 95◦C for 30 s, 57 ◦C for 30 s and 72 ◦C for 45 s, and single extension at 72 ◦C for 10 min. PCR products were purified using the AxyPrep DNA Gel Extraction Kit (Axygen Bio-sciences, Union City, CA, USA) and quantified using QuantiFluor™-ST (Promega, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The purified amplicons were pooled into libraries and paired-end sequenced (2 × 300) on the Illumina MiSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, USA) by Majorbio Bio-Pharm Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). NEXTFLEX Rapid DNA-Seq Kit (Bioo Scientific, USA) and MiSeq Reagent Kit v3 (Illumina USA) were used for constructing libraries and sequencing. Raw reads were deposited into the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA) database.

Totally, 17,097,594 raw reads with barcodes were generated. Raw reads were removed if they contained a 50-bp continuous fragment with an average quality score lower than 20 and/or any ambiguities using Fastp. Samples were distinguished according to the barcode sequence. Filtered raw fastq files were merged together according to the overlapped sequence using FLASH. Subsequent analyses were performed using the standard pipeline of Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology (QIIME). In particular, OTUs were defined at a 97% sequence similarity level using UPARSE, and chimeric sequences were identified and removed using the UCHIME program. Totally, 8,548,797 sequences of 156 samples were left after quality filtering. The taxonomy of each 16S rRNA gene sequence was assigned by the RDP classifier algorithm against the Silva (SSU132) 16S rRNA gene database with a 70% similarity threshold. Then, the filtered data were normalized according to the minimum sequence number, and 28,622 sequences per sample were left.

Alpha diversity indices, including phylogenetic distance, the Chao 1 estimator, equitability (a Shannon index-based measure of evenness), and the Shannon index, were calculated to estimate community richness and diversity using the normalized read abundance. Differences in alpha diversity between groups were tested using t-tests with Bonferroni adjustments. For beta diversity analysis, nonmetric multidimensional scaling (NMDS) was carried out based on the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity. Initial differences in community structure between total and active bacteria were tested for significance by analysis of similarities (ANOSIM). ANOSIM was also used to test significant changes in total and active community compositions among different treatments. All the above statistical analyses were performed using the Vegan package of the R software. The differences in dominant genera between treatments were evaluated using the nonparametric Wilcoxon test. Spearman’s rank correlations between extracellular enzyme activities and changes in the relative abundances of bacteria were performed and displayed using the R Vegan and Corrplot libraries.

For network analysis, we removed OTUs with a relative abundance less than 0.01% of the total sequences to reduce the number of rare genera in the data set. To reduce noise and thus false-positive predictions for each network, we restricted our analysis to genera that were present in >1/3 of the samples. The datasets were uploaded to the open-accessible network analysis pipeline (Molecular Ecological Network Analysis Pipeline, MENAP), and Spearman correlation coefficients among different species were calculated. The networks were constructed using the random matrix theory-based methods. Network visualization and modular analysis were conducted using Gephi.

3. Results

3.1. Changes in DOC concentration and pH value in microcosm experiments

The DOC concentrations of Ulva-derived DOM were 166.1 ± 10.6 mM. Addition of Ulva-derived DOM led to a final concentration of 391.0 ± 12.8 and 1023.4 ± 28.9 μM DOC in the DOM-treated 1 (T1) and DOM-treated 2 (T2) groups, respectively, while the concentration was 219.5 ± 21.7 μM in control groups. The DOC concentrations showed great temporal variations in the treated groups, especially in T2 that had a higher DOM addition. In T2, DOC decreased by 70% during the first 12 h from 1023.4 ± 28.9 μM to 459.4 ± 28.9 μM. Then, DOC concentrations gradually declined to a minimum value of 261.0 ± 56.4 μM at 36 h, indicating rapid organic matter utilization by bacterial communities. From 36 h to 72 h in T2, the DOC concentrations slightly increased by 174.0 μM before a gradual decline. At the final time point, a higher concentration of DOC was consumed in T2 (88.8%) compared to T1 (75.6%), but the DOC concentration in T2 was still higher than that in T1. Compared to the treated groups, the DOC concentrations were less variable over time in the control groups. The pH value showed a great change over time in the treated groups. In T2, the pH value increased by 0.27 during the first 12 h and decreased to a minimum value (7.73) at 72 h before a gradual increase until 168 h. In C2, the fluctuating range of the pH value was less than 0.1 within 96 h, which then increased gradually to 8.05.

3.2. DOM addition stimulated strong and prompt increases in bacterial abundance

Total bacterial 16S rRNA gene copies were 1.8 × 106 copies ml 1 in the initial coastal water. DOM addition initiated a strong stimulation of bacteria growth within 24 h, with 16S rRNA gene copies of the total | Time (h) | Bacteria (gene copies ml-1) | Vibrio (gene copies ml-1) |
|----------|------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| 24       | 8.4 × 107                    | 1.0 × 107                 |
| 48       |                                          |                                       |
| 72       |                                          |                                       |
| 96       |                                          |                                       |
| 120      |                                          |                                       |
| 144      |                                          |                                       |
| 168      |                                          |                                       |

Changes in the concentration of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) (A) and pH value (B) during the incubation of seawater bacterial community supplemented with dissolved organic matter (DOM); (C, D) total bacterial and Vibrio abundances (gene copies ml-1) were quantified based on the 16S rRNA gene; (E, F) culturable abundances of bacteria and Vibrio (CFU ml-1) were quantified by a plate counting method on MA and TCBS; (G, H) active bacterial and Vibrio abundances (gene copies ml-1) were quantified based on the cDNA. Error bars are from triplicate incubations. Asterisks indicate significant differences. P-value of < 0.05 (*), < 0.01 (**), or < 0.001 (***). C2, control 2; T2, DOM-treated 2.

bacteria reaching maximum values of 8.4 × 107 copies ml-1 at 24 h for T2 and 1.0 × 107 copies ml-1 at 6 h for T1. This increase in 16S rRNA gene copy numbers aligned with increases in the number of CFUs and the level of bacterial activity. For example, the number of CFUs increased about 1900 folds from 0 h to 24 h in T2. The bacterial abundance then dropped from 24 h to 48 h, after which an increasing trend was observed until 168 h.

### DOM addition reduced bacterial diversity during microcosm incubation

Sequencing of the 16S rDNA and 16S rRNA samples at different time points yielded a total of 2663 operational taxonomic units (OTUs) at a 97% identity level. In general, the richness and diversity indices were significantly higher in C1 than in treated groups, indicating that nutrient or DOM addition decreased the richness and diversity of bacterial communities. Addition of nutrients (C2) and J. Liang et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106687

DOM at a low concentration (T1) had a similar effect, as evidenced by the comparable levels of the richness and diversity indices across all time points (Fig. S3). However, DOM addition at a higher concentration (T2) correlated to greater decreases in Phylogenetic distance and Chao 1 indices from 48 h to 72 h compared to values in C2 (Figs. S3E and S3F). Likewise, the active bacterial communities were less diverse in T2 than in C2, as represented by variations in the Phylogenetic distance and Chao 1 indices (Fig. S3). The most notable change was seen in Gammaproteobacteria, the relative abundance of which increased rapidly from 26.5% in the initial seawater (sampled at 0 h) to 62.0% in T1 and 54.3% in T2 after 6 h of incubation (Fig. S5).

3.4. DOM addition caused a sequential shift in bacterial community composition
Incubations with DOM also led to changes in bacterial community compositions. A NMDS analysis at the OTU level revealed two distinct bacterial succession periods, i.e., 0–48 h and 72–168 h (ANOSIM, R2 = 0.82, P ≤ 0.001; Fig. 3A and S4). Moreover, the bacterial community structure varied significantly among treatments at both the two succession periods (ANOSIM, R2 = 0.45 for 0–48 h; R2 = 0.57 for 72–168 h, P ≤ 0.001). The community composition of active bacteria showed no significant difference from that of total bacteria across the whole incubation in either C2 (ANOSIM, P > 0.05) or T2 (P > 0.05). Indeed, the active bacteria exhibited a similar temporal variation pattern as the total bacteria (ANOSIM, R2 = 0.76, P ≤ 0.001, Fig. 3B).

Like Vibrio, three other genera including Pseudoalteromonas, Nautella, and Thalassobius also increased in abundance within the first 6 h of incubation in T2 (Wilcoxon test, P < 0.05) but to a lesser extent (Fig. 4B). By contrast, opposite trends were seen in the abundance of Marinobacterium, SAR11 and OM43 clades (P < 0.05; Fig. 4). Notably, incubation for such a short time clearly increased the activity (higher 16S rRNA:rDNA ratios than the initial seawater) of some rare genera such as Neptuniibacter, Oceanobacter, Oceanospirillum and Corallomonas of Gammaproteobacteria (Figs. S8A and S8C), which may participate in DOM processing.

After 6 h, the relative abundance of Vibrio decreased gradually to below its initial value. This was accompanied by an increase in Flavobacteriia, which increased from 20.9% to 38.2% after 36 h of incubation in T2 (Fig. S5). Within Flavobacteriia, the genera Wenyingzhuangia and Tamlana significantly increased, but they peaked at different time points. Wenyingzhuangia reached the maximum proportion of 11.0% at 24 h, while Tamlana peaked at 48 h with a proportion of 11.5% (Fig. 4). However, there was no obvious increase of Wenyingzhuangia in response to low DOM (T1, Fig. S7A). After 48 h, members of Alphaproteobacteria began to grow, and the most dominant genus, Donghicola, was maintained at a high abundance from 96 to 168 h, with an average proportion of 44.8% in the total bacterial community in T2 (Fig. 4). A similar proportion of this genus was also found in T1 and C2 at 96 h (Fig. S7), which was significantly higher than the corresponding proportion in C1 (Wilcoxon test, P < 0.05). The activity of Donghicola was also high, with a 16S rRNA:rDNA ratio > 1 at 144 h (Fig. S8K). Alteromonas and the SAR11 clade (mainly Family Surface 1) also increased in T2 after 48 h but to a lesser extent than Donghicola (Fig. 4).

3.5. DOM addition induced changes in bacterial extracellular enzyme activities
Enzymatic hydrolysis of 12 different substrates (polysaccharides, lipids, and proteins) was measured by monitoring the fluorescence released (Fig. 6). The enzymatic activity against all substrates changed dramatically within the first 48 h, with the variation amplitudes being significantly higher in the treatment group than in the control group. Among all the enzymes, lipase showed the highest activity (up to ~2800 nM min 1 L 1 at 36 h in T2), followed by aminopeptidase and phosphatase (Figs. 6 and S9). In T2, α-glucosidase and galactosaminidase activities increased rapidly and peaked at 12 h (Fig. 6A and E), while β-glucosidase and sulfatase activities reached maxima at 24 h (Fig. 6B and K). | Time (h) | Acidimicrobiales | Actinobacteria | Micrococcales | Corynebacteriales | Thalassobius | Vibrio | Pseudoalteromonas | Tamlana | Rhodobacterales | Wenyingzhuangia | Log |
|----------|-------------------|----------------|---------------|-------------------|--------------|--------|-------------------|---------|------------------|------------------|-----|
|          |                   |                |               |                   |              |        |                   |         |                  |                  |     |
|          |                   |                |               |                   |              |        |                   |         |                  |                  |     |
|          |                   |                |               |                   |              |        |                   |         |                  |                  |     |
|          |                   |                |               |                   |              |        |                   |         |                  |                  |     |
|          |                   |                |               |                   |              |        |                   |         |                  |                  |     |
|          |                   |                |               |                   |              |        |                   |         |                  |                  |     |
|          |                   |                |               |                   |              |        |                   |         |                  |                  |     |
|          |                   |                |               |                   |              |        |                   |         |                  |                  |     |
|          |                   |                |               |                   |              |        |                   |         |                  |                  |     |
|          |                   |                |               |                   |              |        |                   |         |                  |                  |     |

Fig. 4. Community composition of the top 30 bacterial groups at the order (A) and genus (B) levels in T2. Dot size in the panel A is proportional to the relative abundance of microbial groups. The relative abundance at the genus level (B) was log transformed. The data shown in the figure was the mean of replicates performed in three individual carboys.

50 at the late period of incubation, no corresponding extracellular enzyme activities were observed.

1 83040 T2 3.6. DOM addition caused strong taxon-taxon competitions

1 20

"10-

24 48 72 96 120 144 168

Time (h)

Fig. 5. Shift in the relative abundance of Vibrio in the C2 and T2 groups during incubation. Error bars are from triplicate incubations.

other eight enzymes showed the highest activity at 36 h along with a sharp decrease in the abundance of total bacteria. After 48 h, all extracellular enzyme activities disappeared but for sulfatase and lipase, the activities of which rose again after 48 h and peaked at 72 h (sulfatase) and 96 h (lipase).

To identify microorganisms potentially contributing to the extracellular enzyme activities, Spearman’s correlations were calculated between taxon abundance and extracellular enzyme activity in T2. Vibrio, Pseudoalteromonas, Thalassobius and Wenyingzhuangia had positive correlations with most of the extracellular enzymes, indicating that they may utilize DOM by releasing extracellular enzymes. Among all the enzymes, aminopeptidase was the most common, with its activity being positively correlated with 12 different genera. Although some taxa (Donghicola, SAR11 clade, Alteromonas, etc.) were abundant.

A network interface was constructed to explore the topological and taxonomic characteristics of microbial co-occurrence patterns. In total, 218 genera with a relative abundance > 0.01% were retained to estimate their pairwise Spearman correlations. The resulting network consisted of 154 nodes (taxa) and 1479 edges (associations between taxa) for T2, and 140 nodes and 739 edges for T1, while the C2 network consisted of 132 nodes and 445 edges. All the networks were dominated by positive correlations, with the percentage of positive correlations being lower in T2 (66.4%) and T1 (89.4%) than in C2 (94.2%). Moreover, the T2 and T1 networks had higher values of average clustering coefficient, and lower average path distance and harmonic geodesic distance than the C2 network, indicating closer connections between bacterial taxa in treated groups amendment with DOM.

The value of maximal eigenvector centrality (0.18) and the high node degree (63) reflected that Vibrio was highly connected and centrally clustered within the network, indicating that Vibrio was the keystone taxon in T2. Indeed, the number of correlations between Vibrio and other genera was higher in T2 (63 links) than in C2 (11 links). Vibrio showed positive correlations with seven genera in both C2 and T2, including Pseudoalteromonas, Marinomonas and Lutibacter. However, in contrast to C2, Vibrio in T2 exhibited positive correlations with many other taxa, such as Wenyingzhuangia and Formosa of Flavobacteriia. More importantly, negative correlations between Vibrio and other genera were observed only in T2 (36.5%), including the alphaproteobacterial SAR11 clade and Donghicola, the gammaproteobacterial Glaciecola and Coxiella, and Verrucomicrobia. | Enzyme                        | C2 | T2 | Time (h) |
|-------------------------------|----|----|----------|
| α-glucosidase                 | 150|    | 72       |
| β-glucosidase                 | 100|    | 120      |
| β-xylosidase                  | 100|    | 144      |
| mannosidase                   | 150|    | 168      |
| galactosaminidase            | 100|    | 24       |
| arabinofuranosidase          | 100|    | 72       |
| chitotriosidase               | 500|    | 120      |
| N-acetyl-glucosaminidase     | 4000|   | 144      |
| lipase                        | 3000|   | 168      |
| phosphatase                   | 2000|   | 72       |
| sulfatase                     | 1000|   | 120      |
| aminopeptidase                | 500 |   | 144      |

Changes in extracellular enzyme activity in the C2 and T2 groups during incubation. A, α-glucosidase; B, β-glucosidase; C, β-xylosidase; D, mannosidase; E, galactosaminidase; F, arabinofuranosidase; G, chitotriosidase; H, glucosaminidase; I, lipase; J, phosphatase; K, sulfatase; L, aminopeptidase.

## Discussion

Macroalgal blooms can release massive DOM to surrounding seawater, seriously influencing the marine ecological environment. The concern caused by organic overload has prompted governments to monitor the microbial degradability of aquatic organic matter. Identifying the response order and time scale of different bacterial groups to algal-derived DOM is important to understanding their interactions in the mineralization of complex DOM and evaluating their roles in ecological restoration. We designed here microcosm experiments amended with U. prolifera-derived DOM to study the response of bacterial community at a high temporal resolution. This experimental design facilitated to observe a swift and complex succession of bacterial communities attributed to substrate availability and variability of growth rate. Our results showed that DOM addition triggered significant bacterial growth as short as six hours, which resulted in subsequent decrease of pH and thus affect water quality. However, several bacterial taxa, especially Vibrio, could quickly remove organic matter from the environment by 74.5% within 36 h, implying that DOM transformation by bacteria also contributed to environmental restoration. In addition, the production of various extracellular enzymes was a main metabolic way for utilization of U. prolifera-derived DOM by bacteria.

### Consistent and rapid response of Vibrio to DOM addition

Vibrio are widely distributed and have strong adaptability to various environmental conditions. Although Vibrio comprise ~1% of the total bacterioplankton in seawater, the population can break out rapidly under suitable conditions. This “famine and feast” survival strategy makes Vibrio crucial in the cycling of elements. A number of experimental and field studies have reported the proliferation of Vibrio in relation to blooms of marine phytoplankton (e.g., diatoms, dinoflagellates, and cyanobacteria) and inorganic nutrient addition. In this study, we demonstrated that Vibrio rapidly utilized U. prolifera-derived DOM, forming a robust but transient population bloom. The Vibrio bloom was immediately observed, 6 h after DOM addition, with its relative abundance increasing to account for 38.2% of the total bacterial population. in the supplementary information), Vibrio exhibited a better growth at the high DOM concentration, in line with its copiotrophic lifestyle. There are multiple copies of 16S rRNA gene in Vibrio genomes which might overestimate the Vibrio abundance in amplicon sequencing and qPCR analysis. However, the rapid increase in the abundance of culturable Vibrio indeed verified the changes of Vibrio in response to U. prolifera-derived DOM.

In fact, the high 16S rRNA gene copy number in Vibrio genomes may confer a much shorter generation time compared to other marine bacteria, resulting in the observed fast growth upon DOM addition. Additionally, Vibrio genomes have been found to possess a large number of genes encoding extracellular enzymes and transport systems, which may facilitate them to use a broad spectrum of substrates. The composition of DOM from U. prolifera is rich in labile amino acids, sugars, and lipids. Therefore, Vibrio have a significant advantage over other bacteria in utilizing different types of DOM by possessing a complex enzyme and transport system. Moreover, it has been reported that the extracts of U. prolifera are rich in iron, which is a limiting micronutrient for Vibrio growth in natural environments. A recent study has shown that the sudden addition of iron into seawater can lead to robust growth of Vibrio spp. Therefore, the presence of iron in U. prolifera extracts may be another stimulator of Vibrio bloom. It is interesting that such bacterial blooms were not observed after the first 12 h in other DOM addition experiments, which might be caused by their low DOC concentrations and different chemical compositions. The concentration of DOC in T2 was >1000 μM, close to the level in seawater during U. prolifera outbreak and significantly higher than that in previous incubation experiments (<200 μM). The high concentrations and specific compositions of U. prolifera-derived DOM might have initiated a rapid bloom in the Vibrio population.

It is notable that several Vibrio spp. are well-known bacterial pathogens that can cause diseases in humans or marine animals, including Vibrio parahaemolyticus, V. harveyi, V. campbellii, etc. Thus, the bloom of Vibrio caused by U. prolifera may pose a potential health threat in the coastal environment. Indeed, a large fraction of potential pathogenic Vibrio was found in the DOM treated groups of this study, although the short sequence length may add some uncertainty to their taxonomic identity. Three OTUs were similar to V. parahaemolyticus, which accounted for ~48.6% of total Vibrio at 6 h in T2. V. parahaemolyticus infections are common and can cause severe gastroenteritis in humans. The detrimental effects of these potential pathogenic Vibrio on the health of human and marine animals require further verification. Due to one-time addition of DOM in our incubation experiment, the Vibrio bloom was relatively transient. In the natural marine environment, however, the bloom of potential pathogenic Vibrio in the field may last for a longer time because of continuous DOM supply, which is likely to pose a greater health threat.

### Bacterial community succession and DOM utilization pattern

Our data revealed a clear bacterial community succession upon input of U. prolifera-derived DOM. We hypothesized that the bacterial community dynamics were related to changes in the availability of organic matter based on a comprehensive analysis of bacterial community, extracellular enzyme activity and DOM concentration. The microbially driven remineralization of DOM varies among different bacterial groups. While LMW DOM can be readily used by bacteria, HMW molecules need to be enzymatically hydrolyzed into small molecules before being used. The composition of DOM from U. prolifera is complex, containing not only labile amino acids, lipids, and oligosaccharides but also a high proportion (~20%) of HMW polysaccharides. Therefore, we supposed the preferential utilization of different molecules in U. prolifera-derived DOM by different bacterial taxa may induce a unique bacterial response in community structure over time.

Gammaproteobacteria, especially Vibrio, dominated the first phase of bacterial succession (Phase 1). Some members of Gammaproteobacteria are well-known opportunistic heterotrophs and exhibit rapid growth upon nutrient pulses derived from phytoplankton and sediment. Concomitantly, a rapid decrease in the concentration of DOC was observed in this phase. This DOM consumption was facilitated by a set of extracellular enzymes, including lipase, glucosidase and phosphatase, whose activity increased sharply and are involved in the degradation of common/labile organic matter. In particular, the activities of α-glucosidase and galactosaminidase that are involved in the hydrolysis of starch and galactosamine reached maxima at 12 h, indicating that they played specific roles in the initial labile DOM degradation.

Similar to Gammaproteobacteria, the Roseobacter clade within Alphaproteobacteria increased in the early stage of incubation. The Roseobacter clade has been reported to exhibit relatively high activities of LMW substrate transporters during algal blooms. We inferred that small molecular substances were swiftly utilized by this opportunistic group over 12 h. An interesting observation in DOM-treated groups was that the initial abundance of bacterial taxa that bloom in the early stage of incubation was low, usually accounting for <2% of total bacteria. This adaptive feast-or-famine life strategy may have a disproportionately large effect on the fate of carbon.

The second phase of succession (Phase 2) was characterized by peaks in the relative abundance of flavobacterial genera Wenyingzhuangia and Tamlana that reached up to ~11% of the total population at 24 and 48 h, respectively. However, the genera of Flavobacteriia that bloomed in this phase were distinct from those rapidly responded to a diatom bloom, indicating that the specificity of macroalgae-derived organic matter can trigger different bacterial responses. During this phase, the rate of DOC consumption in T2 decreased from 47.0 μM h 1 (shorter than 12 h) to 8.3 μM h 1 (24–36 h), and the total concentration of DOC decreased by 198.4 μM (24–36 h), accounting for 24.3% of the initial addition, which was close to the proportion of polysaccharide in Ulva. Polysaccharides from Ulva are sulfated, requiring sulfatases for their complete degradation. The observation of a peak of sulfatase activity at 24 h also indicated that polysaccharides might be one of the main substrates for bacteria in this period (Phase 2a). In addition, the activity of eight extracellular enzymes that involved in degradation of lipid, hemicellulose and protein reached the top at 36 h, hinting that some flavobacterial genera might participate in the degradation of less degradable substrates.

Another interesting observation during the second phase was an increase in the DOC concentration from 36 h to 72 h, which paralleled rapid decreases in the abundance of total bacteria and Vibrio. It was interesting to find that the relative abundance of Bdellovibrionales increased from 24 to 48 h, making up 3.5% of the community, before the abundance of bacteria declined. Members of Bdellovibrionales, including the OM27 clade and Halobacteriovorax, are known to prey on bacteria. Therefore, it was reasonable to infer that the decrease in Vibrio and total bacterial abundance was mainly attributed to the predatory activity of Bdellovibrionales, which may result in releases of cellular contents from previously dominant bacteria and may be responsible for the increase of DOM (Phase 2b). A sharp decrease of all extracellular enzyme activities from 36 h to 48 h also indicated the lysis of bacteria.

The bacterial-derived DOM may facilitate the growth of other bacterial taxa within the community, which we defined as the third phase (Phase 3). Indeed, bacterial-derived DOM (such as | Phase | Group | Group | Group | Group | Group | Group | Group | Group | Group | Group | Group |
|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
|       | Phase 2a | Phase 2b | Phase |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
|       | Direct uptake | DOM | Enzymolysis |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
|       | Green tide DOM | Green tide DOM | Bacterial DOM | Bacterial DOM |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
|       | Time (h) | Time (h) | Time (h) |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| Vibrio | Wenyingzhuangia | MAbfio | Wenyingzhuangia | Total Bdellovibrionales | Vibnio | Wenyingzhuangia |       |       |       |       |       |
| Nautelj | Donghicola | Nautedla | Donghicola | Halobacteriovorax | Nautella | Donghicola |       |       |       |       |       |
| Thalassobius | SARTT Clado | Thalassobius | SARTT Clado |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |

Fig. 7. A schematic diagram of different phases in the degradation of U. prolifera-derived DOM. The line chart showing the succession of dominant bacterial group across the incubation in T2. Group 1, fast-growing community, including Vibrio, Nautella, and Thalassobius; Group 2: specialists use extracellular enzymes to degrade macromolecules, including Wenyingzhuangia and Tamlana; Group 3, bacteria that utilize bacteria-derived DOM, such as Donghicola and Alteromonas.

polysaccharides, lipids, and proteins) are important sources of the marine carbon pool. Compared to the labile algal-derived DOM, the bacterial DOM consists of structural lipids, diaminopimelic acid (biomarkers of peptidoglycan), as well as other cellular debris that are resistant to rapid microbial degradation. An increase in the relative abundance of Alteromonas and Donghicola was observed after 48-h incubation, suggesting that those groups might be the main consumers of bacterial-derived DOM. This is supported by the fact that Alteromonas could degrade complex polysaccharides by using freely released or cell-surface associated enzymes. Genomic analysis of Donghicola tyrosinivorans using the CAZy database has shown that the number of genes that may be involved in cell wall degradation (including GH103 and GH108) was high, indicating that bacterial-derived DOM could be degraded by members of Donghicola. Moreover, the lipase activity increased with the elevation of Donghicola, suggesting that this genus might be the degrader of bacteria-derived lipids. Interestingly, the genus Nautella increased in relative abundance following the additions of both U. prolifera-derived DOM (0–6 h) and bacterial DOM (48–72 h), indicating that Nautella might degrade a broad spectrum of DOM. It was noticeable that all of the measured extracellular enzyme (except lipase and sulfatase) activities varied little after 48 h, implying that these bacteria may use other types of enzymes or metabolic ways (direct uptake of substrates and no enzyme production) to utilize DOM. Most of the substrates used for measuring extracellular enzyme activity are dimers, therefore only the activities of exo-acting enzymes were measured. Further work needs to be carried out to examine the changes in activities of endo-acting enzymes that cleave a polymer midchain. Additionally, an increase in relative abundance of the SAR11 clade was observed from 48 h on in T2. The SAR11 clade has a high number of LMW transporters for amino acids and sugars. We speculated that transporting nutrients into cells might be an effective way for SAR11 members under low nutritional stress.

5. Conclusion

Using microcosm incubations, we demonstrated clear time-resolved patterns in changes of total and active bacterial communities and extracellular enzyme activities in response to U. prolifera-derived DOM. A robust and rapid growth of Vibrio was observed within a short time after DOM addition, indicating that this group plays a key role in the early stage of DOM transformation. Subsequently, some genera of Flavobacteriia that may be involved in polysaccharide degradation grew rapidly. The growth of Donghicola of Alphaproteobacteria was observed later in the experiment, which may respond to the availability of bacterial-derived DOM that results from the predation of Bdellovibrionales. These results indicated that bacterial heterotrophs differed in their substrate preferences, resulting in a clear community succession following the addition of chemically complex DOM. This was indeed proven by the observation of a clear variation in extracellular enzyme activities during incubation. In addition, potential pathogenic bacteria might bloom in the process of DOM utilization, thus may posing a potential health threat in the coastal environment.

6. Availability of data and material

The datasets generated during the current study are available in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), Sequence Read Archive (SRA), under the accession numbers PRJNA562054 and PRJNA562056. Investigation.            Xuchen          Wang:          Investigation.            Xiao-Hua           Zhang:
Conceptualization, Visualization, Supervision, Project administration,

Funding acquisition, Writing - review &                          editing.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Nos. 2018YFE0124100 and 2016YFA0601303), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 41730530, 91751202, 92051115 and 41976101), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Nos. 202172002 and 202141009).

Appendix A.             Supplementary material

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2021.106687.

| Author(s) | Title | Journal | Year | Volume | Pages |
|-----------|-------|---------|------|--------|-------|
| Aguilera-Morales, M., Casas-Valdez, M., Carrillo-Domınguez, S., Gonz´alez-Acosta, B., P´erez-Gil, F. | Chemical composition and microbiological assays of marine algae Enteromorpha spp. as a potential food source | J. Food Compos. Anal. | 2005 | 18 | 79–88 |
| Arnosti, C. | Microbial extracellular enzymes and the marine carbon cycle | Ann. Rev. Mar. Sci. | 2011 | 3 | 401–425 |
| Zhou, J., Deng, Y., Luo, F., He, Z., Yang, Y. | Phylogenetic molecular ecological network of soil microbial communities in response to elevated CO2 | mBio | 2011 | 2 | e00122–11 |
| Bastian, M., Heymann, S., Jacomy, M. | Gephi: an open source software for exploring and manipulating networks | Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, ICWSM 2009 | 2009 | | San Jose, California, USA, May 17–20 |
| Beier, S., Rivers, A.R., Moran, M.A., Obernosterer, I. | The transcriptional response of prokaryotes to phytoplankton-derived dissolved organic matter in seawater | Environ. Microbiol. | 2015 | 17 | 3466–3480 |
| Cao, Y., Wu, Y., Fang, Z., Cui, X., Song, X. | Spatiotemporal patterns and morphological characteristics of Ulva prolifera distribution in the Yellow Sea, China in 2016–2018 | Remote Sens. | 2019 | 11 | 445 |
| Carlson, C.A., Hansell, D.A. | Chapter 3 - DOM sources, sinks, reactivity, and budgets | Biogeochemistry of Marine Dissolved Organic Matter, second ed. | 2015 | | Academic Press, Boston |
| Chauhan, A., Cherrier, J., Williams, H.N. | Impact of sideways and bottom-up control factors on bacterial community succession over a tidal cycle | PNAS | 2009 | 106 | 4301–4306 |
| Chi, Y., Li, Y., Zhang, G., Gao, Y., Ye, H., Gao, J., Wang, P. | Effect of extraction techniques on properties of polysaccharides from Enteromorpha prolifera and their applicability in iron chelation | Carbohydr. Polym. | 2018 | 181 | 616–623 |
| Cui, J., Li, Y., Wang, S., Chi, Y., Hwang, H., Wang, P. | Directional preparation of anticoagulant-active sulfated polysaccharides from Enteromorpha prolifera using artificial neural networks | Sci. Rep. | 2018 | 8 | 3062 |
| Deng, Y., Jiang, Y.-H., Yang, Y., He, Z., Luo, F., Zhou, J. | Molecular ecological network analyses | BMC Bioinform. | 2012 | 13 | 113 |
| Eiler, A., Gonzalez-Rey, C., Allen, S., Bertilsson, S. | Growth response of Vibrio cholerae and other Vibrio spp. to cyanobacterial dissolved organic matter and temperature in brackish water | FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. | 2007 | 60 | 411–418 |
| Eilers, H., Pernthaler, J., Amann, R. | Succession of pelagic marine bacteria during enrichment: a close look at cultivation-induced shifts | Appl. Environ. Microb. | 2000 | 66 | 4634–4640 |
| Farmer, J.J., Janda, J.M., Brenner, F.W., Cameron, D.N., Birkhead, K.M. | Genus I. Vibrio Pacini 1854 | Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology, second ed. | 2005 | | Springer Science Business Media, New York, pp. 494–546 |
| Goldman, J.C. | Regulation of gross growth efficiency and ammonium regeneration in bacteria by substrate C: N ratio | Limnol. Oceanogr. | 1987 | 32 | 1239–1252 |
| Ho, Y. | Inorganic mineral nutrient level studies on Potamogeton pectinatus L. and Enteromorpha prolifera in Forfar Loch, Scotland | Hydrobiologia | 1979 | 62 | 7–15 |
| Hoppe, H.-G. | Use of fluorogenic model substrates for extracellular enzyme activity (EEA) measurement of bacteria | Handbook of Methods in Aquatic Microbial Ecology | 1993 | | Lewis Publishers, Boca Raton, Florida |
| Jain, A., Krishnan, K.P., Begum, N., Singh, A., Thomas, F.A., Gopinath, A. | Response of bacterial communities from Kongsfjorden (Svalbard, Arctic Ocean) to macroalgal polysaccharide amendments | Mar. Environ. Res. | 2020 | 155 | 104874 |
| Jiao, N., Liu, J., Edwards, B., Lv, Z., Cai, R., Liu, Y., Xiao, X., Wang, J., Jiao, F., Wang, R., Huang, X., Guo, B., Sun, J., Zhang, R., Zhang, Y., Tang, K., Zheng, Q., Azam, F., Batt, J., Cai, W.-J., He, C., Herndl, G.J., Hill, P., Hutchins, D., LaRoche, J., Lewis, M., MacIntyre, H., Polimene, L., Robinson, C., Shi, Q., Suttle, C.A., Thomas, H., Wallace, D., Legendre, L. | Correcting a major error in assessing organic carbon pollution in natural waters | Sci. Adv. | 2021 | 7 | eabc7318 |
| Klindworth, A., Pruesse, E., Schweer, T., Peplies, J., Quast, C., Horn, M., Glockner, F.O. | Evaluation of general 16S ribosomal RNA gene PCR primers for classical and next-generation sequencing-based diversity studies | Nucleic Acids Res. | 2013 | 41 | e1 |
| Landa, M., Cottrell, M.T., Kirchman, D.L., Kaiser, K., Medeiros, P.M., Tremblay, L., Batailler, N., Caparros, J., Catala, P., Escoubeyrou, K., Oriol, L., Blain, S., Obernosterer, I. | Phylogenetic and structural response of heterotrophic bacteria to dissolved organic matter of different chemical composition in a continuous culture study | Environ. Microbiol. | 2014 | 16 | 1668–1681 |
| Lapota, D., Galt, C., Losee, J.R., Huddell, H.D., Orzech, J.K., Nealson, K.H. | Observations and measurements of planktonic bioluminescence in and around a milky sea | J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. | 1988 | 119 | 55–81 |
| Lin, G., Sun, F., Wang, C., Zhang, L., Zhang, X. | Assessment of the effect of Enteromorpha prolifera on bacterial community structures in aquaculture environment | PLoS ONE | 2017 | 12 | e0179792 |
| Liu, J., Zhu, S., Liu, X., Yao, P., Ge, T., Zhang, X.H. | Spatiotemporal dynamics of the archaeal community in coastal sediments: assembly process and co-occurrence relationship | ISME J. | 2020 | 14 | 1463–1478 |
| Liu, M., Dong, Y., Zhao, Y., Zhang, G., Zhang, W., Xiao, T. | Structures of bacterial communities on the surface of Ulva prolifera and in seawaters in an Ulva blooming region in Jiaozhou Bay, China | World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. | 2011 | 27 | 1703–1712 |
| McCarren, J., Becker, J.W., Repeta, D.J., Shi, Y., Young, C.R., Malmstrom, R.R., Chisholm, S.W., DeLong, E.F. | Microbial community transcriptomes reveal microbes and metabolic pathways associated with dissolved organic matter turnover in the sea | PNAS | 2010 | 107 | 16420–16427 |
| Middelboe, M., Jørgensen, N.O.G. | Viral lysis of bacteria: an important source of dissolved amino acids and cell wall compounds | J. Mar. Biol. Assoc. UK | 2006 | 86 | 605–612 |
| Mourino-P´erez, R.R., Worden, A.Z., Azam, F. | Growth of Vibrio cholerae O1 in red tide waters off California | Appl. Environ. Microb. | 2003 | 69 | 6923–6931 |
| Nebbioso, A., Piccolo, A. | Molecular characterization of dissolved organic matter (DOM): a critical review | Anal. Bioanal. Chem. | 2013 | 405 | 109–124 |
| Oksanen, J., Blanchet, F.G., Friendly, M., Kindt, R., Legendre, P., McGlinn, D., Minchin, P.R., O’Hara, R.B., Simpson, G.L., Solymos, P., Henry, M., Stevens, H., Szoecs, E., Wagner, H. | vegan: Community Ecology Package | R package version (2.5-3) | 2013 | | (https://github.com/vegandevs/vegan) |
| O’Neill, K., Schreider, M., McArthur, L., Schreider, S. | Changes in the water quality characteristics during a macroalgal bloom in a coastal lagoon | Ocean Coast. Manage. | 2015 | 118 | 32–36 |
| Orsi, W.D., Smith, J.M., Liu, S., Liu, Z., Sakamoto, C.M., Wilken, S., Poirier, C., Richards, T.A., Keeling, P.J., Worden, A.Z., Santoro, A.E. | Diverse, uncultivated bacteria and archaea underlying the cycling of dissolved protein in the ocean | ISME J. | 2016 | 10 | 2158–2173 |
| Pedler, B.E., Aluwihare, L.I., Azam, F. | Single bacterial strain capable of significant contribution to carbon cycling in the surface ocean | PNAS | 2014 | 111 | 7202–7207 |
| Reintjes, G., Arnosti, C., Fuchs, B., Amann, R. | Selfish, sharing and scavenging bacteria in the Atlantic Ocean: a biogeographical study of bacterial substrate utilisation | ISME J. | 2019 | 13 | 1119–1132 |
| Sharma, A.K., Becker, J.W., Ottesen, E.A., Bryant, J.A., Duhamel, S., Karl, D.M., Cordero, O.X., Repeta, D.J., DeLong, E.F. | Distinct dissolved organic matter sources induce rapid transcriptional responses in coexisting populations of Prochlorococcus, Pelagibacter and the OM60 clade | Environ. Microbiol. | 2014 | 16 | 2815–2830 |
| Sogin, M.L., Morrison, H.G., Huber, J.A., Mark Welch, D., Huse, S.M., Neal, P.R., Arrieta, J.M., Herndl, G.J. | Microbial diversity in the deep sea and the underexplored “rare biosphere” | PNAS | 2006 | 103 | 12115–12120 |
| Takemura, A.F., Chien, D.M., Polz, M.F. | Associations and dynamics of Vibrionaceae in the environment, from the genus to the population level | Front. Microbiol. | 2014 | 5 | 38 |
| Teeling, H., Fuchs, B.M., Becher, D., Klockow, C., Gardebrecht, A., Bennke, C.M., Kassabgy, M., Huang, S., Mann, A.J., Waldmann, J., Weber, M., Klindworth, A., Otto, A., Lange, J., Bernhardt, J., Reinsch, C., Hecker, M., Peplies, J., Bockelmann, F. D., Callies, U., Gerdts, G., Wichels, A., Wiltshire, K.H., Gl¨ockner, F.O., Schweder, T., Amann, R. | Substrate-controlled succession of marine bacterioplankton populations induced by a phytoplankton bloom | Science | 2012 | 336 | 608–611 |
| Thompson, J.R., Randa, M.A., Marcelino, L.A., Tomita-Mitchell, A., Lim, E., Polz, M.F. | Diversity and dynamics of a North Atlantic coastal Vibrio community | Appl. Environ. Microb. | 2004 | 70 | 4103–4110 |
| Traving, S.J., Thygesen, U.H., Riemann, L., Stedmon, C.A. | A model of extracellular enzymes in free-living microbes: which strategy pays off? | Appl. Environ. Microb. | 2015 | 81 | 7385–7393 |
| Tripp, H.J. | The unique metabolism of SAR11 aquatic bacteria | J. Microbiol. | 2013 | 51 | 147–153 |
| Walters, W., Hyde, E.R., Berg-Lyons, D., Ackermann, G., Humphrey, G., Parada, A., Gilbert, J.A., Jansson, J.K., Caporaso, J.G., Fuhrman, J.A., Apprill, A., Knight, R. | Improved bacterial 16S rRNA gene (V4 and V4–5) and fungal internal transcribed spacer marker gene primers for microbial community surveys | mSystems | 2016 | 1 | e00009–e15 | J. Liang et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106687

Wang, X., Liu, J., Liang, J., Sun, H., Zhang, X.-H., 2020. Spatiotemporal dynamics of the total and active Vibrio spp. populations throughout the Changjiang estuary in China. Environ. Microb. 22, 4438–4455.
Wei, T., Simko, V., 2017. R package “corrplot”: Visualization of a Correlation Matrix (Version 0.84).
Westrich, J.R., Ebling, A.M., Landing, W.M., Joyner, J.L., Kemp, K.M., Griffin, D.W., Lipp, E.K., 2016. Saharan dust nutrients promote Vibrio bloom formation in marine surface waters. PNAS 113, 5964–5969.
Wietz, M., Wemheuer, B., Simon, H., Giebel, H.A., Seibt, M.A., Daniel, R., Brinkhoff, T., Simon, M., 2015. Bacterial community dynamics during polysaccharide degradation at contrasting sites in the Southern and Atlantic Oceans. Environ. Microbiol. 17, 3822–3831.
Williams, H.N., Lymperopoulou, D.S., Athar, R., Chauhan, A., Dickerson, T.L., Chen, H., Laws, E., Berhane, T.-K., Flowers, A.R., Bradley, N., Young, S., Blackwood, D., Murray, J., Mustapha, O., Blackwell, C., Tung, Y., Noble, R.T., 2015. Halobacteriovorax, an underestimated predator on bacteria: potential impact relative to viruses on bacterial mortality. ISME J. 10, 491.
Woollen, J.W., Heyworth, R., Walker, P.G., 1961. Studies on glucosaminidase. 3. Testicular N-acetyl-beta-glucosaminidase and N-acetyl-beta-galactosaminidase. Biochem. J. 78, 111–116.
Zdziebło, A., Synowiecki, J., 2002. New source of the thermostable α-glucosidase suitable for single step starch processing. Food Chem. 79, 485–491.
Zhang, T., Wang, X., 2017. Release and microbial degradation of dissolved organic matter (DOM) from the macroalgae Ulva prolifera. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 125, 192–198.
Zhang, X.-H., Lin, H., Wang, X., Austin, B., 2018. Significance of Vibrio species in the marine organic carbon cycle—A review. Sci. China Earth Sci. 61, 1357–1368.
Zhang, X., Song, Y., Liu, D., Keesing, J.K., Gong, J., 2015. Macroalgal blooms favor heterotrophic diazotrophic bacteria in nitrogen-rich and phosphorus-limited coastal surface waters in the Yellow Sea. Estuar. Coast. Shelf S. 163, 75–81.
Zhang, X., Wang, H., Mao, Y., Liang, C., Zhuang, Z., Wang, Q., Ye, N., 2009. Somatic cells serve as a potential propagule bank of Enteromorpha prolifera forming a green tide in the Yellow Sea, China. J. Appl. Phycol. 22, 173–180.
Zhang, Y., He, P., Li, H., Li, G., Liu, J., Jiao, F., Zhang, J., Huo, Y., Shi, X., Su, R., Ye, N., Liu, D., Yu, R., Wang, Z., Zhou, M., Jiao, N., 2019. Ulva prolifera green-tide outbreaks and their environmental impact in the Yellow Sea, China. Natl. Sci. Rev. 6, 825–838.
Zhou, J., Deng, Y., Luo, F., He, Z., Tu, Q., Zhi, X., 2010. Functional molecular ecological networks. mBio 1, e00169-11. 