Environment International 155 (2021) 106683

**The early-life exposome and epigenetic age acceleration in children**

**Keywords:**
Aging
Epigenetic age acceleration

The early-life exposome influences future health and accelerated biological aging has been proposed as one of the underlying biological mechanisms. We investigated the association between more than 100 exposures assessed during pregnancy and in childhood (including indoor and outdoor air pollutants, built environment, green environments, tobacco smoking, lifestyle exposures, and biomarkers of chemical pollutants), and epigenetic age acceleration in 1,173 children aged 7 years old from the Human Early-Life Exposome project. Age acceleration

**Abbreviations:**
1HNMR, Hydrogen Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
BC, Black Carbon
BiB, Born in Bradford
BMI, Body Mass Index
BMIQ, Beta-Mixture Quantile
BUPA, N-Butyl Paraben
CI, Confidence Interval
CpGs, Cytosine-phosphate-Guanine Sites
DBPs, Disinfection By-Product
DEP, Diethyl phosphate
DETP, Diethyl Thiophosphate
DMDTP, Dimethyl Dithiophosphate
DNA, Deoxyribonucleic acid
DNAm, DNA methylation
EC, Elemental Carbon
EDEN, Etude des Déterminants Pré et Postnatals du Développement et de la Santé de l’Enfant
eQTM, Expression Quantitative Trait Methylation
ExWAS, Exposome-Wide Association Study
GIS, Geographic Information System
HCB, Hexachlorobenzene
HELIX, Human Early-Life Exposome
INMA, Infancia y Medio Ambiente
IQR, Interquartile Range
KANC, Kaunas Cohort
KEGG, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
MoBA, Norwegian Mother, Father and Child Cohort Study
NO2, Nitrogen Dioxide
OCs, Organochlorine Compounds
OPs, Organophosphate Pesticides
OXBE, Oxybenzone
PBDEs, Polybrominated Diphenyl Ethers
PCB-138, Polychlorinated Biphenyl-138
PCB-153, Polychlorinated Biphenyl-153
PCB-170, Polychlorinated Biphenyl-170
PCB-180, Polychlorinated Biphenyl-180
PCBs, Polychlorinated Biphenyls
PedBE, Paediatric-Buccal-Epigenetics
PFASs, Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances
PFOS, Perfluorooctane Sulfonate
PM10, Particulate Matter of <10μm in aerodynamical diameter
PM2.5, Particulate Matter of <2.5μm in aerodynamical diameter
PMabs, Absorbance of PM2.5 filters, measurement of the blackness of PM2.5 filters used as a proxy for elemental/black carbon
RHEA, Mother-Child Cohort in Crete
SHS, Second-hand smoke
SNPs, single nucleotide polymorphisms
TCs, Transcript Clusters
TEX, Toluene‑Ethylbenzene‑x-Xylene Pregnancy was calculated based on Horvath’s Skin and Blood clock using child blood DNA methylation measured by Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChips. We performed an exposure-wide association study between prenatal and childhood exposome and age acceleration. Maternal tobacco smoking during pregnancy was nominally associated with increased age acceleration. For childhood exposures, indoor particulate matter absorbance (PMabs) and parental smoking were nominally associated with an increase in age acceleration. Exposure to the organic pesticide dimethyl dithiophosphate and the persistent pollutant polychlorinated biphenyl-138 (inversely associated with child body mass index) were protective for age acceleration. None of the associations remained significant after multiple-testing correction. Pregnancy and childhood exposure to tobacco smoke and childhood exposure to indoor PMabs may accelerate epigenetic aging from an early age.

1. Introduction

Current evidence shows that early-life, including prenatal and early postnatal periods, could be considered as an important window of susceptibility to environmental exposures. Being exposed during these stages might permanently change the body’s structure, metabolism, and physiology, and hence promote health or diseases in later stages of life. Determining which exposures could be beneficial or detrimental for human health, and identifying the underlying biological mechanisms, could provide important evidence for reducing or enhancing exposure to them during early life.

Aging is a gradual and multifactorial process, which is characterized by the physiological deterioration of the human body over time. At the molecular level, aging is described as the accumulation of cellular damage, which leads to structural and functional abnormalities and the decrease in the regenerative capacity of the cells. Biological aging is reported to be a risk factor for the development of age-related diseases such as cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular, and neurodegenerative diseases as well as increased mortality. In this context, aging could be considered as a continuous process already starting in early-life. Consequently, evaluating aging during this period might provide new evidence to slow down this process from the beginning and, prevent or delay the development of adverse health outcomes during adulthood and elderly.

The evaluation of aging at the molecular level can be carried out using a series of biomarkers including epigenetic clocks, which predict DNA methylation age of an individual from its DNA methylation levels. The property of DNA methylation to change with age is used by these clocks to identify a subset of cytosine-phosphate-guanine sites (CpGs) that can predict chronological age. There are a number of epigenetic clocks available with a few ones applicable to children. From these clocks, we can calculate epigenetic age acceleration, a measure of whether the individuals’ are biologically younger or older than their chronological age. Although, DNA methylation is just one of the pathways by which epigenetics affect gene expression, besides histone modification or non-coding RNA, we will be referring to the rest of the text to DNA methylation age as epigenetic age. Epigenetic age acceleration has been linked to age-related conditions such as cancer, cellular senescence, and mortality, among others.

Recent evidence has shown that different environmental factors such as air pollution, tobacco smoke or cadmium exposure can increase epigenetic age acceleration. However, the evidence available is still scarce and not consistent, and most of the studies evaluated the impact on adults and elderly populations, with few studies available on such an impact on children. Moreover, most of the studies have investigated one environmental exposure, and there is a paucity of studies considering multiple exposures. This study aimed to investigate the association between the early life exposome (covering prenatal and childhood period) and epigenetic age acceleration in children from the Human Early-Life Exposome (HELIX) project.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Study population

This study was conducted in the context of the HELIX project, which was based on six on-going longitudinal population-based birth cohorts established in six countries across different parts of Europe (Born in Bradford [BiB; UK], Étude des Déterminants Prénatals du Développement et de la Santé de l’Enfant [EDEN; France], Infancia y Medio Ambiente [INMA; Spain], Kaunas Cohort [KANC; Lithuania], Norwegian Mother, Father and Child Cohort Study [MoBa; Norway], and Mother-Child Cohort in Crete [RHEA; Greece]). Prior to the start of HELIX, all six cohorts had undergone the required evaluation by national ethics committees and obtained all the required permissions for their cohort recruitment and follow-up visits. Each cohort also confirmed that relevant informed consent and approval were in place for secondary use of data from pre-existing data. The work in HELIX was covered by new ethic approvals in each country and at enrolment in the new follow-up, participants were asked to sign a new informed consent form. For this study we sub-selected 1,173 children which had information on the exposome, and blood DNA methylation.

2.2. Exposome assessment during prenatal and early childhood

A broad range of environmental exposures was evaluated, including 83 prenatal and 103 childhood exposure variables. Detailed exposure assessment was previously explained elsewhere. Briefly, geospatial models, monitoring stations, satellite data and land use databases were used to estimate the urban exposome and air pollution. An estimated exposure value was assigned to each study participant separately for their geocoded addresses of home through GIS platforms. During pregnancy, at birth or during childhood, maternal and children blood and urine samples were collected by each cohort to assess chemical exposures: organochlorine compounds (OCs), organophosphate pesticides (OPs) metabolites, polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs), essential minerals, non-essential minerals, phenols, phthalate metabolites, and cotinine. During pregnancy, exposure to water disinfection by-product (DBPs) was also assessed based on models for the water supply according to their residency. Indoor exposure to air pollutants including particulate matter absorbance (PMabs), which is a proxy of elemental/black carbon as it measures the blackness of PM2.5 filters, NO2, benzene and TEX-toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene, was estimated through a prediction model trained in a subgroup of children (n = 157) using home personal measurements and questionnaire data including parental smoking behaviour, among other variables. Questionnaires were used to gather information on active and/or passive tobacco smoking, socio-economic capital of the family, social participation, social contact, house crowding, and other lifestyle factors as maternal and children diet, physical activity and sleep duration.
An imputation process was performed for missing data of all exposures and covariates, resulting in 20 imputed databases. For comparability, continuous exposure variables were standardised by the interquartile range (IQR).

## Methylation data collection

Blood samples were collected from HELIX subcohort children at a mean age of 8.1 years. DNA was extracted from buffy coat using the Chemagen kit. DNA concentration was determined in a NanoDrop 1000 UV–Vis Spectrophotometer and with Quant-iT™ PicoGreen® dsDNA Assay Kit. Blood leukocyte DNA methylation was measured using the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 beadchip at the University of Santiago de Compostela – Spanish National Genotyping Center (CeGen-USC, Spain). Briefly, 700 ng of DNA were bisulfite-converted using the EZ 96-DNA methylation kit following the manufacturer’s standard protocol, and DNA methylation measured using the Infinium protocol. Within each batch (slide), all the samples were randomized and balanced by cohort and sex. DNA methylation data was pre-processed using minfi R package. Two samples were filtered due to overall quality: one had a call rate < 98% at detection p-value threshold < 1.0x10 16 and the other did not pass general quality control parameters. Then, data was normalized with the functional normalization method with Noob background subtraction and dye-bias correction. Then, we checked sex consistency, genetic consistency of technical/biological duplicates and other samples making use of the genotype probes of the array and the genome-wide genotyping data when available. In total four samples were excluded, two with discordant sex and two with discordant genotypes. Batch effect (slide) was corrected using the ComBat R package. Control probes, probes in sexual chromosomes, probes designed to detect single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and probes to measure methylation levels at non-CpG sites were removed, giving a final number of 386,518 probes. Finally, CpGs were annotated using the IlluminaHumanMethylation450kanno.ilmn12.hg19 R package.

## Calculation of epigenetic age with different clocks

Child epigenetic age based on different clocks (Horvath’s All Tissue clock, Horvath’s Skin and Blood clock, the Paediatric-Buccal-Epigenetics’ (PedBE) clock and Wu’s methylation-based age prediction model) was calculated using the methylclock R package. Briefly, from normalized and batched corrected methylation data, the package extracts methylation levels of CpGs included in each clock (Table S2). Subsequently, the coefficients obtained through elastic net in the prediction models of each of the clocks in the original papers are used to calculate DNA methylation age and epigenetic age acceleration. Therefore, for each clock we obtained: i) DNA methylation predicted age (DNAm age) in years, ii) ageAcc, difference between DNAm and chronological age in years; iii) ageAcc2, residuals obtained after regressing chronological age on DNAm age, and iv) ageAcc3, residuals obtained after regressing chronological age and blood cell type proportions on DNAm age. We estimated blood cell type proportion (CD4T, CD8T, Mono, Bcell, NK, Neu and Eos) using the Reinius et al. reference panel as implemented in meffil package.
Additionally, we retrieved the same variables for the Horvath All Tissue clock through the Horvath’s online calculator, which starts from raw data (IDAT files) and implements a normalization based on re-purposing the beta-mixture quantile (BMIQ) method.

## Gene expression data collection

RNA was extracted from whole blood collected in Tempus tubes with the MagMAX for Stabilized Blood Tubes RNA Isolation Kit. The quality of RNA was evaluated with a 2100 Bioanalyzer and the concentration with a NanoDrop 1000 UV–Vis Spectrophotometer. Gene expression was assessed with the Affymetrix Human Transcriptome Array 2.0 ST arrays (HTA 2.0) at the University of Santiago de Compostela, following manufacturer’s recommendations. Samples were processed in two different rounds. In each round, several batches of 24–48 samples were processed. Samples were randomized per batch taking into account sex and cohort. Raw data were extracted with the AGCC software and stored into CEL files. The GCCN (SST-RMA) algorithm was applied to normalize data at gene level. After normalization four samples with discordant sex were excluded. The HTA-2_0 Transcript Cluster Annotations Release na36 (hg19) was employed to annotate transcript clusters (TCs) to genes. A TC is defined as a group of one or more probes covering a region of the genome reflecting all the exonic transcription evidence known for the region and corresponding to a known or putative gene. Control probes and probes in sexual chromosomes or probes without chromosome information were excluded. Probes with a DABG (Detected Above Background) p-value < 0.05 were considered to have an expression level different from the background, and they were defined as detected. Probes with a call rate < 1% were excluded from the analysis. The final dataset consisted of 58,254 TCs. Gene expression values were log2 transformed and batch effect was controlled by residualizing the effect of surrogate variables calculated with the sva method while protecting for main variables in the study (cohort, age, sex, and blood cellular composition).

## Covariates

During pregnancy and in the childhood follow-up examination information on the following key covariates was collected: cohort (BIB, EDEN, INMA, MOBA, KANC and RHEA), self-reported maternal education (primary school, secondary school and university degree or higher), maternal age at conception (continuous in years), self-reported ancestry (European, Asian and Pakistani, or other), self-reported maternal pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI) (continuous in kg/m2), birth weight (<2500 g, >=2500–3500 g, >=3500–4000 g, or >=4000 g), gestational age at delivery (continuous in weeks) and child’s BMI z-score (continuous in kg/m2). A bivariate analysis was conducted through linear regression models to determine the crude relationship between the covariates and the outcome of our study (Table S3).

## Statistical analyses

### Descriptive analyses and correlations

For continuous variables, we calculated median and interquartile range (IQR) and for categorical variables, frequency and percentage. Pearson’s correlation was used to test the correlation between DNA methylation age, calculated with different epigenetic clocks, and chronological age.

### Exposome-wide association study of epigenetic age acceleration

To assess the association between the prenatal and childhood exposome and age acceleration we performed an exposome-wide association # Results

# Study population

The study included 1,173 children from the HELIX project, aged between 6 and 11 years old that had information on DNA methylation and on the exposome. Of these children 89.3% were of European ancestry, 54.9% were males, a 20.9% were overweight or obese, and 50.7% were born from mothers with a university degree or higher education level (Table 1).

# Selection of the best epigenetic clock for children

We calculated epigenetic age using different clocks: “Horvath’s All Tissue clock” (with methylclock R package and Horvath’s online calculator), “Horvath’s Skin and Blood clock”, “PedBe’s clock” and Wu’s methylation-based age prediction model (with methylclock R package) (Table S2). The correlations of the epigenetic age (DNAmAge) calculated from each clock vs. chronological age measured in years are presented in Fig. 1. We found that “Horvath’s Skin and Blood clock” showed the strongest correlation with chronological age (R = 0.85, p < 2.2x10 16). The methylation-based age prediction model by Wu et al., and “Horvath’s All Tissue clock”, obtained from methylclock R package showed a slightly weaker correlation (R = 0.75, p < 2.2x10 16; R = 0.72, p < 2.2x10 16, respectively). However, slightly stronger than the one obtained from “Horvath’s online calculator” (R = 0.61, p < 2.2x10 16). The “PedBE’s clock”, although trained in DNA methylation from buccal cells in children (from 0 years to 20 years), showed the lowest correlation (R = 0.53, p < 2.2x10 16). Considering that DNAm data was obtained from blood and observing Pearson’s correlation results between epigenetic age and chronological age in our study population, we decided to continue the analyses with the “Horvath’s Skin and Blood epigenetic clock”, using age acceleration adjusted for blood cell type proportion as the main outcome. Table 1
Characteristics of the study population (n = 1,173).

| Variable                                   | n (%) or median (IQR)                      |
|--------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| Cohort                                     |                                            |
| BIB                                        | 203 (17.3)                                 |
| EDEN                                       | 146 (12.4)                                 |
| INMA                                       | 215 (18.3)                                 |
| KANC                                       | 198 (16.9)                                 |
| MOBA                                       | 212 (18.1)                                 |
| RHEA                                       | 199 (17)                                   |
| Self-reported ancestry                     |                                            |
| Asian and Pakistani                        | 98 (8.4)                                   |
| European                                   | 1047 (89.3)                                |
| Other                                      | 27 (2.3)                                   |
| Maternal age (years)                      | 31 ± 6.8                                   |
| Maternal education                         |                                            |
| Primary school                             | 176 (15)                                   |
| Secondary school                           | 402 (34.3)                                 |
| University degree or higher                | 595 (50.7)                                 |
| Maternal pre-pregnancy BMI (kg/m2)       | 24.1 ± 5.9                                 |
| Sex of the child                           |                                            |
| Female                                     | 529 (45.1)                                 |
| Male                                       | 644 (54.9)                                 |
| Birthweight                                |                                            |
| <2500 g                                    | 40 (3.4)                                   |
| >=2500–3500 g                              | 662 (56.4)                                 |
| >=3500–4000 g                              | 357 (30.4)                                 |
| >=4000 g                                   | 114 (9.7)                                  |
| Gestational age (weeks)                   | 40 ± 2                                     |
| Child z-score BMI (kg/m2)                 | 0.3 ± 1.5                                   |
| Child BMI (WHO categorization)            |                                            |
| Grade 1/2/3 thinness and Normal weight     | 927 (79.1)                                 |
| Overweight or Obese                        | 246 (20.9)                                 |
| Age at blood collection (years)           | 7.2 ± 2.4                                  |

Note: BIB = Born in Bradford; EDEN = Etude des Déterminants Prénatals et Postnatals du Développement et de la Santé de l’Enfant; INMA = Infancia y Medio Ambiente; KANC = Kaunas Cohort; MoBa = Norwegian Mother, Father and Child Cohort Study; RHEA = Mother-child Cohort in Crete; BMI = Body Mass Index.

Horvath' $ AllI Tissue = lock Horvath'$ AIl Tissue clock Horvath'$ Skin and Blood clock
Re072,0 < 226.16 R-0.61, 3270-[6 Ra0 85,0 < 2 20-IE
DNA Mcthyhtia *
Wu's clock PedBE's clock Standard
R=0.53.0 < 220-16 Clocks Mean deviation
Horvath s All Tissue clock 8.532 2.014
Horvath $ All Tissueclock (online calculator) 7.814 2.081
Horvath 's Skin and Blood clock 6.311 1.474
Wu's clock 4.075 0.749
PedBE's clock 6.503 0.455
Chronological age 7.835 1.543

Fig. 1. Pearson’s correlations between DNA methylation age, calculated with different clocks, and chronological age. Each graph shows a different epigenetic clock:
(A) Horvath’s All Tissue clock (methylclock. R package); (B) Horvath All Tissue clock (Horvath’s online calculator); (C) Horvath’s Skin and Blood clock (methylclock R package); (D) Wu’s clock (methylclock R package); (E) PedBE’s clock (methylclock R package); (F) Summary table of the mean and standard deviation (sd) of the clocks evaluated. Table 2
ExWAS* of prenatal and childhood exposures vs. age acceleration adjusted for blood cell type proportions (main model).

| Exposure | Exposure family | Units | Estimate (95% CI)a | P-value |
|----------|----------------|-------|---------------------|---------|
| Prenatal | Maternal tobacco smoking | Tobacco smoke | No vs. Yes | 0.14 (0.02, 0.26) | 0.025 |
| Childhood | Indoor PMabs | Indoor air | ug/m3 | 0.07 (0.02, 0.12) | 0.003 |
| | Parental smoking | Tobacco smoke | Neither vs. Both | 0.15 (0.01, 0.29) | 0.036 |
| | Dimethyl dithiophosphate (DMDTP) | OP Pesticides | Undetected vs. Detected (adjusted for creatinine) | 0.13 (0.24, 0.02) | 0.017 |
| | Polychlorinated biphenyl-138 (PCB-138) | OCs | ng/g (adjusted for lipids) | 0.07 (0.14, 0.01) | 0.037 |

Note: ExWAS = exposome-wide association study; PMabs = Particulate Matter Absorbance, DMDTP = Dimethyl dithiophosphate; OP Pesticides = Organophosphate Pesticides; PCB-138 = Polychlorinated biphenyl-138; OCs = Organochlorine compounds; IQR = Interquartile range. *Results are presented only for the exposures with nominal significance (p value < 0.05) in the ExWAS adjusted for: child’s sex, cohort, self-reported maternal education, self-reported ancestry and maternal age in years. The analyses were conducted in 1,173 children from the HELIX subcohort. aCoefficient estimates are given in age acceleration effect change for each IQR increase in continuous exposure variables, or relative to the reference category in binary and categorical variables.

Material 2 file for the full set of results: Excel Tables S1 and S2).

3.4. Additional insights on main exposure – epigenetic age acceleration associations

Firstly, we tested the effect of dose and duration of the maternal exposure to tobacco smoking during pregnancy, through linear regression models (Table S5), that suggested a slightly positive trend. Childhood exposure to second-hand tobacco smoke due to parental smoking (classified as: none, one parent, or both parents) also showed a linear trend (Table S5). Secondly, we assessed the effect of the exposure window to tobacco smoke, by running mutually adjusted models. The effect estimates of maternal tobacco smoke during pregnancy adjusted for childhood parental smoking were smaller (28.57% β reduction) (Table S6). A similar pattern was observed when adjusting parental smoking in childhood for maternal tobacco smoke during pregnancy (40% β reduction) (Table S6). To determine if we could disentangle prenatal and childhood smoking exposure, we calculated their correlation. Indeed, a strong positive correlation was shown between exposure to tobacco smoke in both exposure periods (polychoric coefficient = 0.72, prenatal vs. childhood exposure).

In regards to indoor PMabs, we evaluated the influence of parental smoking behaviour and also maternal smoking during pregnancy on the association between indoor PMabs and epigenetic age acceleration as indoor PMabs was estimated through a prediction model trained in a subgroup of children (n = 157) using home personal measurements and questionnaire data including parental smoking behaviour, among other variables (Tamayo-Uria et al., 2019). After adjustment for prenatal or childhood exposure to tobacco smoke, no differences in the estimate coefficients of PMabs were observed (0% β change), suggesting independent effects (Table S7).

Furthermore, given that OP pesticides are present in fruit and vegetables, we speculated that they could be a proxy of fresh fruit and vegetable intake in the study. However, fruit and vegetable intake were not associated with age acceleration (Supplementary Material 2 file for the full set of results: Excel Table S2) and the effect size of the models of DMDTP additionally adjusted for vegetable or fruit intake did not change substantially (7.14% β increase for vegetables and 0% β change for fruit) (Table S9). Given that food frequency questionnaire data has some misclassification issues, we also adjusted the model of DMDTP for urinary hippurate, which is a metabolite marker of fruits and vegetables consumption. Again, the effect size did not change (0% β change) (Table S9), although hippurate was higher in those children with DMDTP over the limit of detection (mean difference = 0.211, p-value < 2x10 16).

Finally, when evaluating the childhood model further adjusted for birthweight, maternal pregnancy body mass index and child z-score body mass index, the effect size of the association between PCB-138 and epigenetic age acceleration was drastically attenuated (53.16% β reduction) (Supplementary Material 2 file for the full set of results: Excel Table S2). In our data, as in other studies, we observed a positive association between child z-score BMI with age acceleration (β = 0.08, 95% CI = -0.05 to 0.12, not adjusted for cell type proportions; β = 0.07, 95% CI = -0.03 to 0.10, adjusted for cell type proportions). Thus, the association of child’s BMI with PCB-138 and with epigenetic age acceleration could explain this reduction.

3.5. Sensitivity analyses

When assessing the association between the prenatal and childhood exposures and epigenetic age acceleration non-adjusted for blood cell type proportions we detected all the associations described above for the main model. However, additional childhood exposures of the same exposure families identified in the main model reached nominal significance (PCB-153, PCB-170, PCB-180, Diethyl thiophosphate (DETP)), as well as of new exposure families (Perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS), Hexachlorobenzene (HCB) and Oxybenzone (OXBE)). None of these associations passed multiple testing correction.

We repeated the prenatal and childhood ExWAS restricting the analyses to European ancestry children and similar results were obtained. For the significant exposure – epigenetic age acceleration associations described above, the absolute percent change in the coefficients (β) between the whole study sample and the subset of European ancestry sample was < 12%.

Finally, we conducted fixed effects inverse variance weighted meta-analysis of results by cohort of the top exposure – epigenetic age acceleration associations. For maternal tobacco smoking during pregnancy and childhood indoor PMabs estimated effects were consistent across cohorts. For the other associations the pattern was slightly more heterogeneous with some cohorts going in the opposite direction. The statistic I2 was lower than was 41% for all exposures.

3.6. eQTM analyses

To interpret the biological meaning of epigenetic age, we searched the genes whose expression was associated with the methylation levels of the CpGs included in the “Horvath’s Skin and Blood clock” in HELIX. 72 CpGs out of the 391 (18.41%) in “Horvath’s Skin and Blood clock” were associated with the expression of 151 unique transcript clusters (TCs, or genes), which were annotated to 129 unique gene symbols. 122 out of 129 genes were mapped in ConsensusPathDB and were enriched for the following biological pathways (q-value < 0.025): i) Adaptive and innate immune system, ii) Apoptosis, cell cycle and cancer, and iii) Detoxification of xenoestrogens. ## Discussion

This is the first study to evaluate associations between a wide range of prenatal and childhood environmental exposures (the early-life exposome) and the epigenetic age acceleration in children. We observed a positive association between maternal tobacco smoke during pregnancy and exposure to parental smoke through childhood and age acceleration in childhood, in line with previous studies. For instance, in adult and elderly populations, active smoking has been correlated with increased epigenetic age acceleration. Others, using the “Horvath’s All tissue clock” clock, have found that maternal smoking increases epigenetic age acceleration as early as at birth and that effect is persistent at least until childhood. We also observed that childhood exposure to second-hand smoke (SHS) was associated with increased age acceleration in children. Adjustment for maternal smoking during pregnancy attenuated the association, and considering that pregnancy active smoking implies a higher dose than childhood passive smoking and that smoking effects on blood DNA methylation seem to be persistent, these results suggest that the SHS association may have been partly confounded by the exposure during the pregnancy period. Prior research described that maternal tobacco smoking was associated with cord blood DNA methylation at >6,000 CpG sites. However, none of these CpGs overlapped with the CpGs used in the Horvath’s Skin and Blood clock, thus suggesting different mechanisms. Moreover, we observed a dose dependent effect regarding exposure to tobacco smoke during pregnancy and childhood, in which a higher dose or a longer duration of the exposure was related with increased estimates. What we observed is biologically plausible and is consistent with previous evidence related to other health outcomes.

In relation to air pollution, we found a positive association between epigenetic age acceleration and childhood indoor PMabs, which is used as a proxy of elemental/black carbon (EC or BC) in the HELIX project. Both pollutants are particles coming from the incomplete combustion of fossil fuels, biofuels, and biomass. Adjustment for childhood SHS exposure did not change this association suggesting that the association observed was led by other sources of PM. Two longitudinal cohort studies, one in adult women and the other in adult men, found that exposure to outdoor BC and ambient PM2.5 were associated with increased age acceleration. Also, a recent study observed that different clusters defined by outdoor PM2.5 component profiles were related to accelerated aging in women. As far as we know there are no studies of the air pollution effects on epigenetic age in children, neither for indoor nor outdoor levels. Thus, further exploration in children is needed.

In this study, we observed an association between higher DMDTP exposure and decreased age accelerations, which is contrary to what we would expect as DMDTP exposure could be considered as a risk factor for age-related diseases (mainly neurodegenerative). We tried to explain the results that we obtained by looking at the possible association reported before between DMDTP exposure and fruit/vegetable intake, in which a higher consumption of fruit/vegetable intake was associated with higher concentrations of DMDTP. As our data on fruit and vegetable intake was obtained by a food frequency questionnaire in which we might be facing misclassification issues, we evaluated a urinary metabolite called hippurate, which is accepted as a metabolite marker of fruits and vegetables consumption. Thus, here hippurate is a biomarker of fruit and vegetables intake, and it might be associated with OPs. However, the role of DMDTP reflecting the effects of fruit and vegetable intake needs further investigation in other studies.

PCBs are widely present in the environment, although whose production was banned in 2001 due to their toxicity and persistence in health. In our study, we observed a protective effect of PCB-138 on epigenetic age acceleration. When we additionally adjusted the model for child BMI z-score, the association was largely attenuated, suggesting that z-score BMI could explain a notable part of the association. It has been previously reported an inverse association between PCB-138 and child z-score BMI or BMI as these chemicals are highly lipophilic and are stored in fat tissues. We thus hypothesize that the association we observed for PCBs might be capturing the relationship between epigenetic age acceleration and body mass index, instead of PCBs exposure. Future studies should address this issue by considering adipose tissue and BMI distinctly, and incorporating toxicokinetic models of PCBs during childhood.

When evaluating epigenetic age acceleration non-adjusted for blood cell type proportions we detected the same associations as in the main model adjusted for cellular composition plus additional associations with lipophilic chemical compounds. These compounds tend to accumulate in lipid-rich tissues, and their serum levels depend on child’s adipose tissue content. At the same time child’s adipose tissue content (i.e., obesity) leads to an inflammatory state and an imbalance of the blood cellular percentages. Thus, we hypothesize that when not considering blood cell type proportions we might be capturing the effects of BMI on epigenetic age acceleration, and in turn confounded associations with the lipophilic chemical compounds. In this sense, most of these associations disappeared in models further adjusted for child’s BMI.

Aging is a multi-factorial process which involves multiple and complex interactions between biological mechanisms. Aging is related to increased oxidative stress and inflammation, increased DNA damage due to reduced DNA repair, and decreased immune response to external agents and tumorigenic cells. We found that part of the CpGs of the Horvath’s Skin and Blood clock were related to the expression of genes involved in pathways relevant for aging processes such as immune response, cell cycle and apoptosis, and detoxification, suggesting that they might mediate the effects of exposure to tobacco smoke, indoor PMabs, and BMI.

Major strengths of the present study encompass detailed and comprehensive assessment of the early-life exposome in six populations across Europe with different cultures and settings. We were able to characterize a broad range of environmental exposures for a relatively large sample size in two separate periods of time, pregnancy and childhood, which can be considered as critical periods of vulnerability for children’s development. Moreover, the environmental exposures that shown an association with epigenetic age acceleration were not correlated among them revealing a non-linear relationship. We have conducted a screening analyses of single exposures using the ExWAS approach, which was characterized by its high sensitivity, but also high false positive rate. In addition, we have published all the estimates obtained for each exposure-epigenetic age acceleration association to avoid selective reporting bias. Finally, we have conducted several sensitivity analyses, which did not result in a notable change in our findings.

Nevertheless, our results should be interpreted in the context of its limitations. First, the “Horvath’s Skin and Blood clock” used in this study was trained considering all ages and it is not specific for children, which could lead to less precision in assessing epigenetic age. However, one of the known epigenetic clocks based on children population used buccal cells, which gave lower correlations with chronological age likely due to the major differences between tissues than among age ranges. A more robust and improved epigenetic clock within the range of age of children based on blood cells is needed as the one evaluated in this study. P. de Prado-Bert et al.
Environment International 155 (2021) 106683

were supported by a FI fellowship from the Catalan Government (FI-DGR 2015 and #016FI_B 00272). MC received funding from Instituto Carlos III (Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness) (CD12/00563 and MS16/00128).
The authors are grateful to all the participating families in the six countries who took part in this cohort study and to all the fieldworkers for their dedication and efficiency. The authors would like to thank Ingvild Essén, Jorun Evandt for thorough field work, Heidi Marie Nordheim for biological sample management and the MoBa-administrative unit, and to all health professionals and researchers who have made BiB happen. A full roster of the INMA and Rhea investigators can be found at https://www.proyectoinma.org/proyecto-inma/investigadores/ and http://www.rhea.gr/en/about-rhea/the-rhea-team/, respectively.
Finally, the authors acknowledge the input of the entire HELIX consortium, specially of Charline Warembourg and also to Aida Ripoll-Cladellas for their direct technical help in statistics and programming.

In summary, our study found that prenatal and childhood exposure to tobacco smoke and childhood indoor PMabs are associated with accelerated epigenetic aging. Epigenetic modifications in pathways involved in inflammation, detoxification and cell cycle control may be mechanisms by which these environmental exposures can impact human health from early life onward. As aging is considered a public health issue worldwide, new evidence in child populations might drive new policies to reduce environmental exposures and promote a “healthy aging” from early stages of life.

Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgments
The study received funding from the European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-206) (grant agreement no 308333) (HELIX project), the H2020-EU.3.1.2. - Preventing Disease Programme (grant agreement no 874583) (ATHLETE project), and from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant Agreement number: 733206) (Early Life stressors and Lifecycle Health (LIFECYCLE)). BiB received funding from the Welcome Trust (WT101597MA), from the UK Medical Research Council (MRC) and Economic and Social Science Research Council (ESRC) (MR/N024397/1). INMA was supported by grants from the Instituto de Salud Carlos III, CIBERESP, and the Generalitat de Catalunya-CIRIT. KANC was funded by the grant of the Lithuanian Agency for Science Innovation and Technology (6-04-2014_31V-66). The Norwegian Mother, Father and Child Cohort Study is supported by the Norwegian Ministry of Health and Care Services and the Ministry of Education and Research. The Rhea project was financially supported by European projects (EU FP6-2003-Food-3-NewGeneris, EU FP6. STREP Hiwate, EU FP7 ENV.2007.1.2.2.2. Project No 211250 Escape, EU FP7-2008-ENV-1.2.1.4 Envirogenomarkers, EU FP7-HEALTH-2009- single stage CHICOS, EU FP7 ENV.2008.1.2.1.6. Proposal No 226285 ENRIECO, EU-FP7- HEALTH-2012 Proposal No 308333 HELIX), and the Greek Ministry of Health (Program of Prevention of obesity and neuro-developmental disorders in preschool children, in Heraklion district, Crete, Greece: 2011-2014; “Rhea Plus”: Primary Prevention Program of Environmental Risk Factors for Reproductive Health, and Child Health: 2012-15). We acknowledge support from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation through the “Centro de Excelencia Severo Ochoa 2019-2023” Program (CEX2018-000806-S), and support from the Generalitat de Catalunya through the CERCA Program. OR was funded by a UKRI Future Leaders Fellowship (MR/S03532X/1). MV-U and CR-A Environment International 155 (2021) 106683

| Author(s) | Title | Journal | Year | Volume | Pages |
|-----------|-------|---------|------|--------|-------|
| Borup, M.T., Trusina, A., Andersson, A.M.C. | Aging mechanism as the “down side” of adaptation: A network approach | J. Theor. Biol. | 2008 | 250 | 66–74 |
| Briggs, N.L., Long, C.M. | Critical review of black carbon and elemental carbon source apportionment in Europe and the United States | Atmos. Environ. | 2016 | 144 | 409–427 |
| Buck Louis, G.M., Smarr, M.M., Patel, C.J. | The exposome research paradigm: an opportunity to understand the environmental basis for human health and disease | Curr. Environ. Heal. reports | 2017 | 4 | 89–98 |
| Cadiou, S., Bustamante, M., Agier, L., Andrusaityte, S., Basaga˜na, X., Carracedo, A., Chatzi, L., Grazuleviciene, R., Gonzalez, J.R., Gutzkow, K.B., Maitre, L., Mason, D., Millot, F., Nieuwenhuijsen, M., Papadopoulou, E., Santorelli, G., Saulnier, P.-J., Vives, M., Wright, J., Vrijheid, M., Slama, R. | Using methylome data to inform exposome-health association studies: An application to the identification of environmental drivers of child body mass index | Environ. Int. | 2020 | 138 | 105622 |
| Camous, X., Pera, A., Solana, R., Larbi, A. | NK cells in healthy aging and age-associated diseases | J. Biomed. Biotechnol. | 2012 | 2012 | 1–8 |
| Carmona, J.J., Mich´an, S. | Biology of healthy aging and longevity | Rev. Inves. Clin. | 2016 |  |  |
| Chen, B.H., Marioni, R.E., Colicino, E., Peters, M.J., Ward-Caviness, C.K., Tsai, P.-C., Roetker, N.S., Just, A.C., Demerath, E.W., Guan, W., Bressler, J., Fornage, M., Studenski, S., Vandiver, A.R., Moore, A.Z., Tanaka, T., Kiel, D.P., Liang, L., Vokonas, P., Schwartz, J., Lunetta, K.L., Murabito, J.M., Bandinelli, S., Hernandez, D.G., Melzer, D., Nalls, M., Pilling, L.C., Price, T.R., Singleton, A.B., Gieger, C., Holle, R., Kretschmer, A., Kronenberg, F., Kunze, S., Linseisen, J., Meisinger, C., Rathmann, W., Waldenberger, M., Visscher, P.M., Shah, S., Wray, N.R., McRae, A.F., Franco, O.H., Hofman, A., Uitterlinden, A.G., Absher, D., Assimes, T., Levine, M.E., Lu, A.T., Tsao, P.S., Hou, L., Manson, J.E., Carty, C.L., LaCroix, A.Z., Reiner, A.P., Spector, T.D., Feinberg, A.P., Levy, D., Baccarelli, A., van Meurs, J., Bell, J.T., Peters, A., Deary, I.J., Pankow, J.S., Ferrucci, L., Horvath, S. | DNA methylation-based measures of biological age: Meta-analysis predicting time to death | Aging (Albany NY) | 2016 | 8 | 1844–1865 |
| Christiansen, L., Lenart, A., Tan, Q., Vaupel, J.W., Aviv, A., Mcgue, M., Christensen, K. | DNA methylation age is associated with mortality in a longitudinal Danish twin study | Aging Cell | 2016 | 15 | 149–154 |
| De Onis, M., Onyango, A.W., Borghi, E., Siyam, A., Nishida, C., Siekmann, J. | Development of a WHO growth reference for school-aged children and adolescents | Bull. World Health Organ. | 2007 | 85 | 660–667 |
| Demanelis, K., Virani, S., Colacino, J., Basu, N., Nishijo, M., Ruangyuttikarn, W., Swaddiwudhipong, W., Nambunmee, K., LS, R. | Cadmium exposure and age-associated DNA methylation changes in non-smoking women from Northern Thailand | Environ. Epigenetics | 2017 | 3 |  |
| Dirinck, E., Jorens, P.G., Covaci, A., Geens, T., Roosens, L., Neels, H., Mertens, I., van Gaal, L. | Obesity and persistent organic pollutants: possible obesogenic effect of organochlorine pesticides and polychlorinated biphenyls | Obesity | 2011 | 19 | 709–714 |
| Domazet, Sidsel L., Grøntved, Anders, Jensen, Tina K., Wedderkopp, Niels, Andersen, Lars B. | Higher circulating plasma polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in fit and lean children: The European youth heart study | Environ. Int. | 2020 | 136 | 105481 |
| Dugu´e, Pierre-Antoine, Bassett, Julie K., Joo, JiHoon E., Jung, Chol-Hee, Ming Wong, Ee, Moreno-Betancur, Margarita, Schmidt, Daniel, Makalic, Enes, Li, Shuai, Severi, Gianluca, Hodge, Allison M., Buchanan, Daniel D., English, Dallas R., Hopper, John L., Southey, Melissa C., Giles, Graham G., Milne, Roger L. | DNA methylation-based biological aging and cancer risk and survival: Pooled analysis of seven prospective studies | Int. J. Cancer | 2018 | 142 | 1611–1619 |
| Fortin, J.-P., Labbe, A., Lemire, M., Zanke, B.W., Hudson, T.J., Fertig, E.J., Greenwood, C.M., Hansen, K.D. | Functional normalization of 450k methylation array data improves replication in large cancer studies | Genome Biol. | 2014 | 15 | 503 |
| Fortin, J.P., Fertig, E., Hansen, K. | shinyMethyl: Interactive quality control of Illumina 450k DNA methylation arrays in R | F1000Research | 2014 | 3 |  |
| Franzke, Bernhard, Neubauer, Oliver, Wagner, Karl-Heinz | Super DNAging-New insights into DNA integrity, genome stability and telomeres in the oldest old | Mutat. Res. - Rev. Mutat. Res. | 2015 | 766 | 48–57 |
| Gao, X., Zhang, Y., Breitling, L.P., Brenner, H. | Relationship of tobacco smoking and smoking-related DNA methylation with epigenetic age acceleration | Oncotarget | 2016 | 7 | 46878–46889 |
| Gibson, Jude, Russ, Tom C., Clarke, Toni-Kim, Howard, David M., Hillary, Robert F., Evans, Kathryn L., Walker, Rosie M., Bermingham, Mairead L., Morris, Stewart W., Campbell, Archie, Hayward, Caroline, Murray, Alison D., Porteous, David J., Horvath, Steve, Lu, Ake T., McIntosh, Andrew M., Whalley, Heather C., Marioni, Riccardo E., Greally, John M. | A meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies of epigenetic age acceleration | PLOS Genet. | 2019 | 15 | e1008104 |
| Gonzalez, J., Pelegí-Sis´o, D. | methylclockData: Data for methylclock package |  | 2021 |  |  |
| Hansen, K.D., Aryee, M. | IlluminaHumanMethylation450kmanifest: Annotation for Illumina’s 450k methylation arrays |  | 2012 |  |  |
| Hayden, K.M., Norton, M.C., Darcey, D., Ostbye, T., Zandi, P.P., Breitner, J.C.S., Welsh-Bohmer, K.A. | Occupational exposure to pesticides increases the risk of incident AD: The cache county study | Neurology | 2010 | 74 | 1524–1530 |
| Hernandez-Ferrer, C., Gonzalez, J.R. | rexposome: Exposome exploration and outcome data analysis |  | 2019 |  |  |
| Holme, F., Thompson, B., Holte, S., Vigoren, E.M., Espinoza, N., Ulrich, A., Griffith, W., Faustman, E.M. | The role of diet in children’s exposure to organophosphate pesticides | Environ. Res. | 2016 | 147 | 133–140 |
| Horstman, A.M., Dillon, E.L., Urban, R.J., Sheffield-Moore, M. | The role of androgens and estrogens on healthy aging and longevity | J. Gerontol. - Ser. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. | 2012 | 67 | 1140–1152 |
| Horvath, Steve | DNA methylation age of human tissues and cell types | Genome Biol. | 2013 | 14 | R115 |
| Horvath, S. | DNA Methylation Age Calculator |  | n.d. |  |  |
| Horvath, S., Oshima, J., Martin, G.M., Lu, A.T., Quach, A., Cohen, H., Felton, S., Matsuyama, M., Lowe, D., Kabacik, S., Wilson, J.G., Reiner, A.P., Maierhofer, A., Flunkert, J., Aviv, A., Hou, L., Baccarelli, A.A., Li, Y., Stewart, J.D., Whitsel, E.A., Ferrucci, L., Matsuyama, S., Raj, K. | Epigenetic clock for skin and blood cells applied to Hutchinson Gilford Progeria Syndrome and ex vivo studies | Aging (Albany. NY) | 2018 | 10 | 1758–1775 |
| Horvath, Steve, Raj, Kenneth | DNA methylation-based biomarkers and the epigenetic clock theory of ageing | Nat. Rev. Genet. | 2018 | 19 | 371–384 |
| Huang, R.C., Lillycrop, K.A., Beilin, L.J., Godfrey, K.M., Anderson, D., Mori, T.A., Rauschert, S., Craig, J.M., Oddy, W.H., Ayonrinde, O.T., Pennell, C.E., Holbrook, J.D., Melton, P.E. | Epigenetic age acceleration in adolescence associates with BMI, inflammation, and risk score for middle age cardiovascular disease | J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. | 2019 | 104 | 3012–3024 |
| Jackson, E., Shoemaker, R., Larian, N., Cassis, L. | Adipose tissue as a site of toxin accumulation | Compr. Physiol. | 2017 | 7 | 1085–1135 |
| Javed, R., Chen, W., Lin, F., Liang, H. | Infant’s DNA Methylation Age at Birth and Epigenetic Aging Accelerators |  | 2016 |  |  |
| Jeong, Clara H., Wagner, Elizabeth D., Siebert, Vincent R., Anduri, Sridevi, Richardson, Susan D., Daiber, Eric J., McKague, A. Bruce, Kogevinas, Manolis, Villanueva, Cristina M., Goslan, Emma H., Luo, Wentai, Isabelle, Lorne M., Pankow, James F., Grazuleviciene, Regina, Cordier, Sylvaine, Edwards, Susan C., Righi, Elena, Nieuwenhuijsen, Mark J., Plewa, Michael J. | Occurrence and toxicity of disinfection byproducts in European drinking waters in relation with the HIWATE epidemiology study | Environ. Sci. Technol. | 2012 | 46 | 12120–12128 |
| Johnson, W.E., Li, C., Rabinovic, A. | Adjusting batch effects in microarray expression data using empirical Bayes methods | Biostatistics | 2007 | 8 | 118–127 |
| Joubert, Bonnie R., Felix, Janine F., Yousefi, Paul, Bakulski, Kelly M., Just, Allan C., Breton, Carrie, Reese, Sarah E., Markunas, Christina A., Richmond, Rebecca C., Xu, Cheng-Jian, Küpers, Leanne K., Oh, Sam S., Hoyo, Cathrine, Gruzieva, Olena, S¨oderh¨all, Cilla, Salas, Lucas A., Baïz, Nour, Zhang, Hongmei, Lepeule, Johanna, Ruiz, Carlos, Ligthart, Symen, Wang, Tianyuan, Taylor, Jack A., Duijts, Liesbeth, Sharp, Gemma C., Jankipersadsing, Soesma A., Nilsen, Roy M., Vaez, Ahmad, Fallin, M. Daniele, Hu, Donglei, Litonjua, Augusto A., Fuemmeler, Bernard F., Huen, Karen, Kere, Juha, Kull, Inger, Munthe-Kaas, Monica Cheng, Gehring, Ulrike, Bustamante, Mariona, Saurel-Coubizolles, Marie Jos´e, Quraishi, Bilal M., Ren, Jie, Tost, J¨org, Gonzalez, Juan R., Peters, Marjolein J., Håberg, Siri E., Xu, Zongli, van Meurs, Joyce B., Gaunt, Tom R., Kerkhof, Marjan, Corpeleijn, Eva, Feinberg, Andrew P., Eng, Celeste, Baccarelli, Andrea A., Benjamin Neelon, Sara E., Bradman, Asa, Merid, Simon Kebede, Bergstr¨om, Anna, Herceg, Zdenko, Hernandez-Vargas, Hector, Brunekreef, Bert, Pinart, Mariona, Heude, Barbara, Ewart, Susan, Yao, Jin, Lemonnier, Nathana¨el, Franco, Oscar H., Wu, Michael C., Hofman, Albert, McArdle, Wendy, Van der Vlies, Pieter, Falahi, Fahimeh, Gillman, Matthew W., Barcellos, Lisa F., Kumar, Ashish, Wickman, Magnus, Guerra, Stefano, Charles, Marie-Aline, Holloway, John, Auffray, Charles, Tiemeier, Henning W., Smith, George Davey, Postma, Dirkje, Hivert, Marie-France, Eskenazi, Brenda, Vrijheid, Martine, Arshad, Hasan, Ant´o, Josep M., Dehghan, Abbas, Karmaus, Wilfried, Annesi-Maesano, Isabella, Sunyer, Jordi, Ghantous, Akram, Pershagen, G¨oran, Holland, Nina, Murphy, Susan K., DeMeo, Dawn L., Burchard, Esteban G., Ladd-Acosta, Christine, Snieder, Harold, Nystad, Wenche, Koppelman, Gerard H., Relton, Caroline L., Jaddoe, Vincent W.V., Wilcox, Allen, Mel´en, Erik, London, Stephanie J. | DNA methylation in newborns and maternal smoking in pregnancy: genome-wide consortium meta-analysis | Am. J. Hum. Genet. | 2016 | 98 | 680–696 |
| Kamburov, Atanas, Pentchev, Konstantin, Galicka, Hanna, Wierling, Christoph, Lehrach, Hans, Herwig, Ralf | ConsensusPathDB: toward a more complete picture of cell biology |  | 2011 | 39 | D712–D717 |
| Kuba, Adam, Raida, Ludek | Graft versus host disease: from basic pathogenic principles to DNA damage response and cellular senescence | Mediators Inflamm. | 2018 | 2018 | 1–13 |
| Kumar, S., Vijayan, M., Bhatti, J.S., Reddy, P.H. | MicroRNAs as peripheral biomarkers in aging and age-related diseases | Progress in Molecular Biology and Translational Science |  |  | 47–94 |
| Lau, Chung-Ho E., Siskos, Alexandros P., Maitre, L´ea, Robinson, Oliver, Athersuch, Toby J., Want, Elizabeth J., Urquiza, Jose, Casas, Maribel, Vafeiadi, Marina, Roumeliotaki, Theano, McEachan, Rosemary R.C., Azad, Rafaq, Haug, Line S., Meltzer, Helle M., Andrusaityte, Sandra, Petraviciene, Inga, Grazuleviciene, Regina, Thomsen, Cathrine, Wright, John, Slama, Remy, Chatzi, Leda, Vrijheid, Martine, Keun, Hector C., Coen, Muireann | Determinants of the urinary and serum |  |  |  |  | metabolome in children from six European populations. BMC Med. 16 (1)

| Author(s) | Year | Title | Journal | Volume | Pages |
|-----------|------|-------|---------|--------|-------|
| Leandro, Giovana S., Sykora, Peter, Bohr, Vilhelm A. | 2015 | The impact of base excision DNA repair in age-related neurodegenerative diseases | Mutat. Res. - Fundam. Mol. Mech. Mutagen. | 776 | 31–39 |
| Leek, Jeffrey T, Storey, John D, Gibson, Greg | 2007 | Capturing heterogeneity in gene expression studies by surrogate variable analysis | PLoS Genet. | 3 (9) | e161 |
| Lehne, B., Drong, A.W., Loh, M., Zhang, W., Scott, W.R., Tan, S.T., Afzal, U., Scott, J., Jarvelin, M.R., Elliott, P., McCarthy, M.I., Kooner, J.S., Chambers, J.C. | 2015 | A coherent approach for analysis of the Illumina HumanMethylation450 BeadChip improves data quality and performance in epigenome-wide association studies | Genome Biol. | 16 | 37 |
| Li, J, Ji, L | 2005 | Adjusting multiple testing in multilocus analyses using the eigenvalues of a correlation matrix | Heredity (Edinb). | 95 (3) | 221–227 |
| Li, Miao-Xin, Yeung, Juilian M.Y., Cherny, Stacey S., Sham, Pak C. | 2012 | Evaluating the effective numbers of independent tests and significant p-value thresholds in commercial genotyping arrays and public imputation reference datasets | Hum. Genet. | 131 (5) | 747–756 |
| Logan, Alan C., Prescott, Susan L., Haahtela, Tari, Katz, David L. | 2018 | The importance of the exposome and allostatic load in the planetary health paradigm | J. Physiol. Anthropol. | 37 (1) |
| López-Otín, Carlos, Blasco, Maria A., Partridge, Linda, Serrano, Manuel, Kroemer, Guido | 2013 | The hallmarks of aging | Cell | 153 (6) | 1194–1217 |
| Lovell, Mark A., Markesbery, William R. | 2007 | Oxidative damage in mild cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer’s disease | J. Neurosci. Res. | 85 (14) | 3036–3040 |
| Lowe, D., Horvath, S., Raj, K. | 2016 | Epigenetic clock analyses of cellular senescence and ageing | Oncotarget | 7 | 8524–8531 |
| Magnus, Per, Birke, Charlotte, Vejrup, Kristine, Haugan, Anita, Alsaker, Elin, Daltveit, Anne Kjersti, Handal, Marte, Haugen, Margaretha, Høiseth, Gudrun, Knudsen, Gun Peggy, Paltiel, Liv, Schreuder, Patricia, Tambs, Kristian, Vold, Line, Stoltenberg, Camilla | 2016 | Cohort profile update: the norwegian mother and child cohort study (MoBa) | Int. J. Epidemiol. | 45 (2) | 382–388 |
| Maitre, Léa, de Bont, Jeroen, Casas, Maribel, Robinson, Oliver, Aasvang, Gunn Marit, Agier, Lydiane, Andrusaityte, Sandra, Ballester, Ferran, Basagaña, Xavier, Borràs, Eva, Brochot, Céline, Bustamante, Mariona, Carracedo, Angel, de Castro, Montserrat, Dedele, Audrius, Donaire-Gonzalez, David, Estivill, Xavier, Evandt, Jorunn, Fossati, Serena, Giorgis-Allemand, Lise, R Gonzalez, Juan, Granum, Berit, Grazuleviciene, Regina, Bjerve Gützkow, Kristine, Småstuen Haug, Line, Hernandez-Ferrer, Carles, Heude, Barbara, Ibarluzea, Jesus, Julvez, Jordi, Karachaliou, Marianna, Keun, Hector C, Hjertager Krog, Norun, Lau, Chung-Ho E, Leventakou, Vasiliki, Lyon-Caen, Sarah, Manzano, Cyntia, Mason, Dan, McEachan, Rosemary, Meltzer, Helle Margrete, Petraviciene, Inga, Quentin, Joane, Roumeliotaki, Theano, Sabido, Eduard, Saulnier, Pierre-Jean, Siskos, Alexandros P, Siroux, Valérie, Sunyer, Jordi, Tamayo, Ibon, Urquiza, Jose, Vafeiadi, Marina, van Gent, Diana, Vives-Usano, Marta, Waiblinger, Dagmar, Warembourg, Charline, Chatzi, Leda, Coen, Muireann, van den Hazel, Peter, Nieuwenhuijsen, Mark J, Slama, Rémy, Thomsen, Cathrine, Wright, John, Vrijheid, Martine | 2018 | Human early life exposome (HELIX) study: a European population-based exposome cohort | BMJ Open | 8 (9) | e021311 |
| Martens, Dries S., Plusquin, Michelle, Cox, Bianca, Nawrot, Tim S. | 2019 | Early biological aging and fetal exposure to high and low ambient temperature: a birth cohort study | Environ. Health Perspect. | 127 (11) | 117001 |
| Martin, E.M., Fry, R.C. | 2018 | Environmental influences on the epigenome: exposure-associated DNA methylation in human populations | Annu. Rev. Public Heal. | 39 | 309–333 |
| McEwen, Lisa M., O’Donnell, Kieran J., McGill, Megan G., Edgar, Rachel D., Jones, Meaghan J., MacIsaac, Julia L., Lin, David Tse Shen, Ramadori, Katia, Morin, Alexander, Gladish, Nicole, Garg, Elika, Unternaehrer, Eva, Pokhvisneva, Irina, Karnani, Neerja, Kee, Michelle Z.L., Klengel, Torsten, Adler, Nancy E., Barr, Ronald G., Letourneau, Nicole, Giesbrecht, Gerald F., Reynolds, James N., Czamara, Darina, Armstrong, Jeffrey M., Essex, Marilyn J., de Weerth, Carolina, Beijers, Roseriet, Tollenaar, Marieke S., Bradley, Bekh, Jovanovic, Tanja, Ressler, Kerry J., Steiner, Meir, Entringer, Sonja, Wadhwa, Pathik D., Buss, Claudia, Bush, Nicole R., Binder, Elisabeth B., Boyce, W. Thomas, Meaney, Michael J., Horvath, Steve, Kobor, Michael S. | 2019 | The PedBE clock accurately estimates DNA methylation age in pediatric buccal cells | Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. | 117 (38) | 23329–23335 |
| Min, J.L., Hemani, G., Smith, G.D., Relton, C., Suderman, M. | 2018 | Meffil: efficient normalization and analysis of very large DNA methylation datasets |  |  |  |
| Nwanaji-Enwerem, Jamaji C., Colicino, Elena, Trevisi, Letizia, Kloog, Itai, Just, Allan C., Shen, Jincheng, Brennan, Kasey, Dereix, Alexandra, Hou, Lifang, Vokonas, Pantel, Schwartz, Joel, Baccarelli, Andrea A. | 2016 | Long-term ambient particle exposures and blood DNA methylation age: findings from the VA normative aging study | Environ. Epigenetics | 2 (2) | dvw006 |
| Nwanaji-Enwerem, J.C., Dai, L., Colicino, E., Oulhote, Y., Di, Q., Kloog, I., Just, A.C., Hou, L., Vokonas, P., Baccarelli, A.A., Weisskopf, M.G., Schwartz, J.D. | 2017 | Associations between long-term exposure to PM2.5 component species and blood DNA methylation age in the elderly | Environ. Int. | 102 | 57–65 |
| Pallister, Tess, Jackson, Matthew A., Martin, Tiphaine C., Zierer, Jonas, Jennings, Amy, Mohney, Robert P., MacGregor, Alexander, Steves, Claire J., Cassidy, Aedin, Spector, Tim D., Menni, Cristina | 2017 | Hippurate as a metabolomic marker of gut microbiome diversity: Modulation by diet and relationship to metabolic syndrome | Sci. Rep. | 7 (1) |
| Papadopoulou, Eleni, Haug, Line Småstuen, Sakhi, Amrit Kaur, Andrusaityte, Sandra, Basagaña, Xavier, Brantsaeter, Anne Lise, Casas, Maribel, Fernández-Barrés, Sílvia, Grazuleviciene, Regina, Knutsen, Helle Katrine, Maitre, Lea, Meltzer, Helle Margrete, McEachan, Rosemary R.C., Roumeliotaki, Theano, Slama, Remy, Vafeiadi, Marina, Wright, John, Vrijheid, Martine, Thomsen, Cathrine, Chatzi, Leda | 2019 | Diet as a source of exposure to environmental contaminants for pregnant women and children from Six European Countries | Environ. Health Perspect. | 127 (10) | 107005 |
| Patel, Chirag J., Bhattacharya, Jayanta, Butte, Atul J., Zhang, Baohong | 2010 | An environment-wide association study (EWAS) on type 2 diabetes mellitus | PLoS ONE | 5 (5) | e10746 |
| Pelegí-Sisó, D., de Prado, P., Ronkainen, J., Bustamante, M., González, J.R. | 2020 | methylclock: a Bioconductor package to estimate DNA methylation age | Bioinformatics |  |  |
| Perna, L., Zhang, Y., Mons, U., Holleczek, B., Saum, K.U., Brenner, H. | 2016 | Epigenetic age acceleration predicts cancer, cardiovascular, and all-cause mortality in a German case cohort | Clin. Epigenetics | 8 | 64 |
| R Core Team | n.d. | R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing |  |  |  |
| Reid, E.K., Tejani, A.M., Huan, L.N., Egan, G., O’Sullivan, C., Mayhew, A.D., Kabir, M. | 2015 | Managing the incidence of selective reporting bias: A survey of Cochrane review groups | Syst. Rev. | 4 | 1–8 |
| Revelle, W.R. | 2017 | psych: Procedures for Personality and Psychological Research |  |  |  |
| Robinson, Oliver, Tamayo, Ibon, de Castro, Montserrat, Valentin, Antonia, Giorgis-Allemand, Lise, Hjertager Krog, Norun, Marit Aasvang, Gunn, Ambros, Albert, Ballester, Ferran, Bird, Pippa, Chatzi, Leda, Cirach, Marta, Dedele, Audrius, Donaire-Gonzalez, David, Grazuleviciene, Regina, Iakovidis, Minas, Ibarluzea, Jesus, Kampouri, Mariza, Lepeule, Johanna, Maitre, Léa, McEachan, Rosie, Oftedal, Bente, Siroux, Valerie, Slama, Remy, Stephanou, Euripides G., Sunyer, Jordi, Urquiza, Jose, Vegard Weyde, Kjell, Wright, John, Vrijheid, Martine, Nieuwenhuijsen, Mark, Basagaña, Xavier | 2018 | The urban exposome during pregnancy and its socioeconomic determinants | Environ. Health Perspect. | 126 (7) | 077005 |
| Ruiz-Arenas, C., Hernandez-Ferrer, C., Vives-Usano, M., Marí, S., Quintela, I., Mason, D., Cadiou, S., Casas, M., Andrusaityte, S., Gutzkow, K.B., Vafeiadi, M., Wright, J., Lepeule, J., Grazuleviciene, R., Chatzi, L., Carracedo, A., Estivill, X., Martí, E., Escaramís, G., Vrijheid, M., González, J.R., Bustamante, M. | 2020 | Identification of blood autosomal cis-expression quantitative trait methylation (cis-eQTMs) in children | bioRxiv |  |  |
| Sadighi Akha, Amir A. | 2018 | Aging and the immune system: An overview | J. Immunol. Methods | 463 | 21–26 |
| Schwarzer, G. | 2007 | meta: An R Package for Meta-Analysis |  | 7 | 40–45 |
| Simpkin, Andrew J., Hemani, Gibran, Suderman, Matthew, Gaunt, Tom R., Lyttleton, Oliver, Mcardle, Wendy L., Ring, Susan M., Sharp, Gemma C., Tilling, Kate, Horvath, Steve, Kunze, Sonja, Peters, Annette, Waldenberger, Melanie, Ward-Caviness, Cavin, Nohr, Ellen A., Sørensen, Thorkild I.A., Relton, Caroline L., Smith, George Davey | 2016 | Prenatal and early life influences on epigenetic age in children: a study of mother-offspring pairs from two cohort studies | Hum. Mol. Genet. | 25 (1) | 191–201 |
| Simpkin, A.J., Howe, L.D., Tilling, K., Gaunt, T.R., Lyttleton, O., Mcardle, W.L., Ring, S. M., Horvath, S., Davey Smith, G., Relton, C.L. | 2017 | The epigenetic clock and physical development during childhood and adolescence: longitudinal analysis from a UK birth cohort | Int. J. Epidemiol. |  |  |
| Sun, Q., Wang, A., Jin, X., Natanzon, A., Duquaine, D., Brook, R.D., Aguinaldo, J.G.S., Fayad, Z.A., Fuster, V., Lippmann, M., Chen, L.C., Rajagopalan, S. | 2005 | Long-term air pollution exposure and acceleration of atherosclerosis and vascular inflammation in an animal model | J. Am. Med. Assoc. | 294 | 3003–3010 |
| Tamayo-Uria, Ibon, Maitre, Léa, Thomsen, Cathrine, Nieuwenhuijsen, Mark J., Chatzi, Leda, Siroux, Valérie, Aasvang, Gunn Marit, Agier, Lydiane, Andrusaityte, Sandra, Casas, Maribel, de Castro, Montserrat, Dedele, Audrius, Haug, Line S., Heude, Barbara, Grazuleviciene, Regina, Gutzkow, Kristine B., Krog, Norun H., Mason, Dan, McEachan, Rosemary R.C., Meltzer, Helle M., Petraviciene, Inga, Robinson, Oliver, Roumeliotaki, Theano, Sakhi, Amrit K., Urquiza, Jose, Vafeiadi, Marina, Waiblinger, Dagmar, Warembourg, Charline, Wright, John, Slama, Rémy, Vrijheid, Martine, Basagaña, Xavier | 2019 | The early-life exposome: Description and patterns in six European countries | Environ. Int. | 123 | 189–200 |
| Teschendorff, A.E., Marabita, F., Lechner, M., Bartlett, T., Tegner, J., Gomez-Cabrero, D., Beck, S. | 2013 | A beta-mixture quantile normalization method for correcting probe design bias in Illumina Infinium 450 k DNA methylation data | Bioinformatics | 29 | 189–196 |
| Textor, Johannes, Hardt, Juliane, Knüppel, Sven | 2011 | DAGitty: A graphical tool for analyzing causal diagrams | Epidemiology | 22 (5) | 745 |
| van Iterson, M., Tobi, E.W., Slieker, R.C., den Hollander, W., Luijk, R., Slagboom, P.E., Heijmans, B.T. | 2014 | MethylAid: Visual and interactive quality control of large Illumina 450k datasets | Bioinformatics | 30 (23) | 3435–3437 |
| Vives-Usano, M., Hernandez-Ferrer, C., Maitre, L., Ruiz-Arenas, C., Andrusaityte, S., Borràs, E., Carracedo, A., Casas, M., Chatzi, L., Coen, M., Estivill, X., González, J.R. |  |  |  |  |  | Environment International 155 (2021) 106683

| Author(s) | Title | Journal | Year | Volume | Pages |
|-----------|-------|---------|------|--------|-------|
| Grazuleviciene, R., Gutzkow, K.B., Keun, H.C., Lau, C.H.E., Cadiou, S., Lepeule, J., Mason, D., Quintela, I., Robinson, O., Sabid´o, E., Santorelli, G., Schwarze, P.E., Siskos, A.P., Slama, R., Vafeiadi, M., Martí, E., Vrijheid, M., Bustamante, M. | In utero and childhood exposure to tobacco smoke and multi-layer molecular signatures in children | BMC Med. | 2020 | 18 | 243 |
| Vrijheid, M., Fossati, S., Maitre, L., M´arquez, S., Roumeliotaki, T., Agier, L., Andrusaityte, S., Cadiou, S., Casas, M., de Castro, M., Dedele, A., Donaire-Gonzalez, D., Grazuleviciene, R., Haug, L.S., McEachan, R., Meltzer, H.M., Papadopouplou, E., Robinson, O., Sakhi, A.K., Siroux, V., Sunyer, J., Schwarze, P.E., Tamayo-Uria, I., Urquiza, J., Vafeiadi, M., Valentin, A., Warembourg, C., Wright, J., Nieuwenhuijsen, M.J., Thomsen, C., Basaga˜na, X., Slama, R., Chatzi, L. | Early-life environmental exposures and childhood obesity: An exposome-wide approach | Environ. Health Perspect. | 2020 | 128 | 1–14 |
| Vrijheid, Martine, Slama, R´emy, Robinson, Oliver, Chatzi, Leda, Coen, Muireann, van den Hazel, Peter, Thomsen, Cathrine, Wright, John, Athersuch, Toby J., Avellana, Narcis, Basaga˜na, Xavier, Brochot, Celine, Bucchini, Luca, Bustamante, Mariona, Carracedo, Angel, Casas, Maribel, Estivill, Xavier, Fairley, Lesley, van Gent, Diana, Gonzalez, Juan R., Granum, Berit, Graˇzulevicˇiene˙, Regina, Gutzkow, Kristine B., Julvez, Jordi, Keun, Hector C., Kogevinas, Manolis, McEachan, Rosemary R.C., Meltzer, Helle Margrete, Sabid´o, Eduard, Schwarze, Per E., Siroux, Val´érie, Sunyer, Jordi, Want, Elizabeth J., Zeman, Florence, Nieuwenhuijsen, Mark J. | The human early-life exposome (HELIX): Project rationale and design | Environ. Health Perspect. | 2014 | 122 | 535–544 |
| Ward-Caviness, C.K., Nwanaji-Enwerem, J.C., Wolf, K., Wahl, S., Colicino, E., Trevisi, L., Kloog, I., Just, A.C., Vokonas, P., Cyrys, J., Gieger, C., Schwartz, J., Baccarelli, A.A., Schneider, A., Peters, A. | Long-term exposure to air pollution is associated with biological aging | Oncotarget | 2016 | 7 | 74510–74525 |
| Weinert, Brian T., Timiras, Poala S. | Invited review: Theories of aging | J. Appl. Physiol. | 2003 | 95 | 1706–1716 |
| Weng, Nan-ping | Aging of the immune system: how much can the adaptive immune system adapt? | Immunity | 2006 | 24 | 495–499 |
| White, Alexandra J., Kresovich, Jacob K., Keller, Joshua P., Xu, Zongli, Kaufman, Joel D., Weinberg, Clarice R., Taylor, Jack A., Sandler, Dale P. | Air pollution, particulate matter composition and methylation-based biologic age | Environ. Int. | 2019 | 132 | 105071 |
| WHO | BMI-for-age (5-19 years) |  |  |  |  |
| Wood, Stephen A., Xu, Feng, Armitage, James M., Wania, Frank | Unravelling the relationship between body mass index and polychlorinated biphenyl concentrations using a mechanistic model | Environ. Sci. Technol. | 2016 | 50 | 10055–10064 |
| Wright, Robert O. | Environment, susceptibility windows, development, and child health | Curr. Opin. Pediatr. | 2017 | 29 | 211–217 |
| Wu, X., Chen, W., Lin, F., Huang, Q., Zhong, J., Gao, H., Song, Y., Liang, H. | DNA methylation profile is a quantitative measure of biological aging in children | Aging (Albany. NY) | 2019 | 11 | 10031–10051 |
| Wu, Xiaohui, Huang, Qingsheng, Javed, Ruheena, Zhong, Jiayong, Gao, Huan, Liang, Huiying | Effect of tobacco smoking on the epigenetic age of human respiratory organs | Clin. Epigenetics | 2019 | 11 | 1 |
| Yang, Yang, Gao, Xu, Just, Allan C., Colicino, Elena, Wang, Cuicui, Coull, Brent A., Hou, Lifang, Zheng, Yinan, Vokonas, Pantel, Schwartz, Joel, Baccarelli, Andrea A. | Smoking-related DNA methylation is associated with DNA methylation phenotypic age acceleration: The veterans affairs normative aging study | Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health | 2019 | 16 | 2356 |
| Zheng, Y., Joyce, B.T., Colicino, E., Liu, L., Zhang, W., Dai, Q., Shrubsole, M.J., Kibbe, W. A., Gao, T., Zhang, Z., Jafari, N., Vokonas, P., Schwartz, J., Baccarelli, A.A., Hou, L. | Blood epigenetic age may predict cancer incidence and mortality | EBioMedicine | 2016 | 5 | 68–73 |
| Zhuge, Y., Qian, H., Zheng, X., Huang, C., Zhang, Y., Li, B., Zhao, Z., Deng, Q., Yang, X., Sun, Y., Zhang, X., Sundell, J. | Effects of parental smoking and indoor tobacco smoke exposure on respiratory outcomes in children | Sci. Rep. | 2020 | 10 | 1–9 | 