# Abstract

## Study Objectives
There is limited knowledge regarding the effects of air pollution on sleep disorders, particularly in children. The aim of this study is to investigate this association in Chinese children.

## Methods
During 2012–2013, 59 754 children aged 2–17 years were randomly selected from 27 districts in seven northeastern Chinese cities. All participants’ sleep was evaluated with the Sleep Disturbance Scale for Children. Four year average concentrations of pollutants were calculated for particles with an aerodynamic diameter of ≤1 μm (PM), ≤2.5 μm (PM2.5) from a spatial statistical model, and ≤10 μm (PM10), sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen dioxide (NO), ozone (O), and carbon monoxide (CO) from monitoring stations. To examine the effects, two-level regression analysis was used, controlling for covariates.

## Results
We observed that sleep disorder was generally associated with all air pollutants, with the highest odds among PM1 exposure for male (odds ratio [OR] 1.55; 95% confidence interval [95% CI] 1.36–1.76) and female (OR 1.50; 95% CI 1.30–1.72) children. The overall strongest association with sleep disorder symptom was exposure to PM1 and Disorders of Excessive Somnolence (OR 1.43; 95% CI 1.30–1.58). PM1 and PM2.5 were strongly associated with all sleep disorder symptoms in females (ORs ranged for PM1 from 1.19 to 1.49; and PM2.5 1.18 to 1.44). The association between air pollutants and total sleep score was generally greater in female than in male children.

## Conclusions
Our findings suggest that exposure to air pollutants increases the odds of sleep disorder in children and point to the need to make reducing exposure to air pollutants a public health priority.

## Statement of Significance
Sleep disorder has become more prevalent in modern society, where emerging studies have reported an association between exposure to cumulative air pollution and elevated risk in adults. Currently, limited knowledge exists among children, and the strength of the association by air pollutants (particles and gaseous) remains unknown. The present study suggests that exposure to all air pollutants was generally associated with increased odds of sleep disorder and sleep disorder symptoms in children. However, the strength of the association varied by air pollutant and type of sleep disorder symptom. We observed that the strongest association was exposure to PM1 on sleep disorder and sleep disorder symptoms. Notably, exposure to PM1 and PM2.5 was associated with sleep disorder and all symptoms in female children.

## Key Words
public health; epidemiology; sleep disorder; pediatrics; Sleep Disturbance Scale for Children ## Introduction
Sleep disorders, such as irregular timing of sleep, inability to fall and maintain asleep, habitual snoring, and sleep movement disorders, have become more prevalent in modern society. Prior studies showed that sleep disorders are increasing among children, where a study conducted in the United States found that 60 per cent of children do not obtain sufficient hours of sleep. Long-term insufficient sleep is associated with adverse psychiatric, metabolic, and cardiovascular health. Emerging studies have suggested a relationship between exposure to air pollution and risk of sleep disorder. Among these studies, majority primarily explored cumulative air pollution, ambient particulate matter (PM) including particles with diameter ≤2.5 μm (PM 2.5), ≤10 μm (PM 10), and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) on overall sleep disorder, sleep-breathing disorder, or habitual snoring, without exploring other sleep disorder symptoms and air pollutants. Studies that explored exposure to air pollution on sleep revealed an association with sleep-breathing disorder, excessive daytime sleepiness, and insomnia-related symptoms in adults; however, limited studies have examined the relationship in children. Although published studies have shown exposure to air pollution is associated with sleep disturbance, the strength of the association among different air pollutants (particles and gaseous) remains unknown. In the present study, we sought to fill multiple knowledge gaps by investigating exposure to particles with diameter ≤1 μm (PM1), PM 2.5, PM 10, NO2, sulfur dioxide (SO2), ozone (O3), and carbon monoxide (CO) on sleep disorder and symptoms in the Seven Northeastern Cities (SNEC) study. We also explored whether the strength of the association varied by gender to determine whether differences exist in vulnerability to explain heterogeneity of findings in prior studies. Our study was based on a large population-based study with validated measurements of sleep disturbance using the Sleep Disturbance Scale for Children (SDSC).

## Anthropometric measurements and data collection
Following standard protocols recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO), children’s weight and height were measured using electronic scales (at 0.1 kg) and fixed stadiometers (at 0.1 cm), in light garments and without shoes. A standardized questionnaire was used to collect information on sociodemographic characteristics, including age, sex, parental education, low birth weight, premature birth, breastfeeding, income, and district of residency. We defined parental education as the highest level of education completed by either parent. Passive smoking was defined as living with someone who smokes cigarettes daily in the child’s residence. Based on parental report, breastfeeding was defined as child being primarily breastfed for at least 3 months. Finally, we defined home coal use as using coal for either space heating or cooking.

## Determination of sleep disorders
SDSC has been validated previously among Italian children and translated from English to Chinese, and validated among Chinese children. SDSC has shown to have adequate internal consistency among Chinese children (α = 0.81) and generally high test/retest reliability (r = 0.071). More details on the validation of SDSC among Chinese children have previously been published. SDSC is a 26-item questionnaire related to quality of sleep and assessment of sleep disorder symptoms over 6 months by total score. To assess sleep quality, two item Likert-type scales consisting of five points that ask (1) for total sleep time ranging from 1 (9–11 hr) to 5 (<5 hr); and (2) latency to sleep onset ranging from 1 (<15 min) to 5 (>60 min). Likert-type scale was also used for the other 24 items to assess frequency of sleep disorder symptoms on a five-point scale: (1) never; (2) occasionally (once or twice a month); (3) sometimes (once or twice a week); (4) often (three to five times a week); and (5) always (six or seven times a week). The six types of sleep-disorder symptoms SDSC identified in children are as follows: (1) sleep-wake transition disorders; (2) disorders of initiating and maintaining sleep; (3) disorders of excessive somnolence; (4) disorders of arousal; (5) sleep hyperhidrosis; and (6) sleep-breathing disorders. Total score and six-factor scores were calculated for each child, where higher scores indicate greater risk of suffering from sleep disorders. To compare between child’s total and factor scores, the scores for potential confounders (e.g. age, gender, parental education, low birth weight, premature birth, breastfeeding, income, passive smoking exposure, home coal use, house pet, and district), can be converted to a T-score (see converted formula below).

Symptoms of sleep disorder was considered present if a child had a T-score >70,

```
T − score = 5 + (0 value − mean) / standard deviation x 10
```

## Ambient air pollution and meteorological data

From 2009 to 2012, one municipal air monitoring station located 1 km from study participants’ home collected measurements on PM10, NO, SO, O3, and CO concentrations using uniform methods and quality assurance. The air monitoring stations were placed in specified distances from industrial sources, residential sources of pollutants (e.g. emissions from combustion of coal, waste, or oil), buildings, and major roadways assuring that the measurements collected were more likely to reflect background air pollution levels. The measurements collected were used to estimate participants’ long-term exposure to air pollutants. The methodology used to obtain measurements strictly followed standards set by the State Environmental Protection Administration of China. Each pollutant concentrations were continuously assessed and reported hourly: PM10 by beta-attenuation, SO2 by ultraviolet fluorescence, NO2 by chemiluminescence, O3 by ultraviolet photometry, and CO by nondispersive infrared spectrometry. Average daily concentration for all pollutants was calculated (averaged over 8 hr). Collected data are based on days for which at least 75 per cent of the 1 hr values were available, following exclusion of abnormal values from each monitoring station collected hourly data. In the present study, exposure parameters were 4 year averages from 2009 to 2012 for concentrations calculated from the 24 hr PM10, NO, SO, and CO concentrations, and 10:00 to 18:00 8 hr O3 concentrations in each district.

Daily PM1 and PM2.5 concentrations were predicted at a 0.1°× 0.1° spatial resolution during 2009–2012 using satellite remote sensing, meteorology, and land use information as described. Briefly, two types of Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer collected aerosol optical depth data, Dark Target and Deep Blue, were combined. A generalized additive model was developed to link ground-monitored PM1 and PM2.5 data with aerosol optical depth data and other spatial and temporal predictors (e.g. urban cover, forest cover, weather data, and calendar month). The results of 10-fold cross-validation showed R2 and root-mean squared error for monthly prediction were 71 per cent and 13.0 μg/m3, respectively.

## Results

Table 1 presents characteristics of study participants, overall and stratified by the presence of sleep disorder. The parental response rate was 93.1 per cent. Overall, our study population composed of 59,754 children with mean age of 10.3 ± 3.6 years: 30,260 (50.6%) were male and 29,494 (49.4%) were female. Children with sleep disorder tended to weigh more, premature birth, exposed to passive smoking, and lower percentage of breastfeeding (all p < 0.001).

Table 2 shows the mean concentration for seven air pollutants measured in this study between 2009 and 2012 and compared with Chinese National Ambient Air Quality Standards and WHO guidelines. PM2.5 exceeded both Chinese National Ambient Air Quality Standards and WHO guidelines in all districts. PM10 also exceeded WHO guidelines for all districts; however, 77.78 per cent (21) of districts exceeded the Chinese National Ambient Air Quality Standards.

We evaluated the relationship between interquartile range (IQR) increase in pollutants retained as a continuous variable and odds of sleep disorder and sleep disorder symptoms using logistic regression models stratified by gender. We observed previously that the overall strongest association for sleep disorder among all children was 1.53, which represents that the odds for sleep disorder increased 53 per cent for each higher interquartile level of PM1 (IQR = 11.6 μg/m3). Sleep disorder was generally associated with air pollutants other than exposure to CO in males, and PM10, SO2, CO in females. PM1 and PM2.5 were strongly associated with all sleep-disorder symptoms for females (ORs ranged for PM1 from 1.19 to 1.49; and PM2.5 1.18 to 1.44). Among males, a similar association was observed (ORs ranged for PM1 from 1.28 to 1.47; and PM2.5 from 1.26 to 1.42), other than sleep-breathing disorder, where findings showed no association with PM1 and PM2.5. Exposure to CO was generally not associated with all sleep disorder symptoms, other than disorders of excessive somnolence in males, where the odds of disorders of excessive somnolence increased 4 per cent for each interquartile level of CO (IQR = 563.4 μg/m3).

We further examined the ORs of sleep disorder by quintile to identify if there is a potential dose-response effect. Figure 1 presents the association between exposure to air pollutants (PM1, PM2.5, and PM10) and prevalence of sleep disorder (%) in children by quintile. We observed noticeable dose response effects for the | Variables                                                                                                               | Total                                 | No Sleep Disorder                                          | Sleep Disorder                             | P        |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|----------|
| Age (years [mean (SD)])                                                                                               | 59 754                                | 57 450 (96.1)                                             | 2304 (3.9)                                | <0.0001  |
| Height (cm, [mean (SD)])                                                                                             | 144.0 (21.7)                          | 143.9 (21.7)                                             | 145.6 (22.4)                              | 0.0005   |
| Weight (kg [mean (SD)])                                                                                              | 40.0 (16.2)                           | 39.9 (16.2)                                              | 41.7 (17.2)                               | <0.0001  |
| Male                                                                                                                 | 30 260 (50.6)                         | 29 058 (50.6)                                           | 1202 (52.2)                               | 0.134    |
| Breastfeeding                                                                                                        | 39 756 (66.5)                         | 38 390 (66.8)                                           | 1366 (59.3)                               | <0.0001  |
| Low birthweight                                                                                                       | 2187 (3.7)                            | 2078 (3.6)                                              | 109 (4.7)                                 | 0.005    |
| Premature                                                                                                             | 3217 (5.4)                            | 3022 (5.3)                                              | 195 (8.5)                                 | <0.0001  |
| Caesarean                                                                                                            | 28 877 (48.3)                         | 27 861 (48.5)                                           | 1016 (44.1)                               | <0.0001  |
| Parental education < higher school                                                                                   | 15 968 (26.7)                         | 15 052 (26.2)                                           | 916 (39.8)                                | <0.0001  |
| Family income per year                                                                                               |                                       |                                                           |                                           | <0.0001  |
| <10 000RMB                                                                                                          | 12 459 (20.9)                         | 11 843 (20.6)                                           | 616 (26.7)                                |          |
| 10 000–30 000RMB                                                                                                    | 22 170 (37.1)                         | 21 236 (37.0)                                           | 934 (40.5)                                |          |
| 30 000–100 000RMB                                                                                                   | 20 998 (35.1)                         | 20 397 (35.5)                                           | 601 (26.1)                                |          |
| >100 000RMB                                                                                                          | 4127 (6.9)                            | 3974 (6.9)                                              | 153 (6.6)                                 |          |
| Home coal use                                                                                                        | 3459 (5.8)                            | 3243 (5.6)                                              | 216 (9.4)                                 | <0.0001  |
| Passive smoking exposure source                                                                                      | 27 822 (46.6)                         | 26 592 (46.3)                                           | 1230 (53.4)                               | <0.0001  |
| Parents responders                                                                                                   | 55 625 (93.1)                         | 53 668 (93.4)                                           | 1957 (84.9)                               | <0.0001  |
| Prevalence of sleep disorder                                                                                          |                                       |                                                           |                                           |          |
| Sleep-wake transition disorders                                                                                        | 2925 (4.9)                            | 1537 (2.68)                                             | 1388 (60.2)                               | <0.0001  |
| Disorders of initiating and maintaining sleep                                                                          | 2404 (4.0)                            | 1221 (2.1)                                              | 1183 (51.4)                               | <0.0001  |
| Disorders of excessive somnolence                                                                                     | 3177 (5.3)                            | 1778 (3.1)                                              | 1399 (60.7)                               | <0.0001  |
| Disorders of arousal                                                                                                  | 2080 (3.5)                            | 979 (1.7)                                               | 1101 (47.8)                               | <0.0001  |
| Sleep hyperhidrosis                                                                                                   | 3949 (6.6)                            | 2784 (4.9)                                              | 1165 (50.6)                               | <0.0001  |
| Sleep-breathing disorders                                                                                             | 3509 (5.9)                            | 2282 (4.0)                                              | 1227 (53.3)                               | <0.0001  |
| Air pollutants (μg/m3)                                                                                               |                                       |                                                           |                                           |          |
| PM1 (mean [SD])                                                                                                      | 46.3 (5.9)                            | 46.2 (5.9)                                              | 47.8 (5.9)                                | <0.0001  |
| PM2.5 (mean [SD])                                                                                                    | 54.1 (6.3)                            | 54.0 (6.3)                                              | 55.7 (6.4)                                | <0.0001  |
| PM10 (mean [SD])                                                                                                     | 86.8 (19.6)                           | 86.7 (19.6)                                             | 89.2 (20.3)                               | <0.0001  |
| SO2 (mean [SD])                                                                                                      | 50.9 (13.9)                           | 50.9 (13.9)                                             | 52.0 (14.2)                               | 0.0002   |
| NO2 (mean [SD])                                                                                                      | 36.5 (10.1)                           | 36.5 (10.1)                                             | 37.3 (10.2)                               | <0.0001  |
| O3 (mean [SD])                                                                                                       | 80.4 (124.6)                          | 79.8 (123.8)                                           | 94.9 (141.8)                              | <0.0001  |
| CO (mean [SD])                                                                                                       | 1378.3 (604.3)                        | 1376.3 (602.7)                                         | 1427.1 (640.5)                            | <0.0001  |

RMB = Chinese Yuan; SD = standard deviation.
Values are n (%).

| Air pollution levelsa                                                | PM1                            | PM2.5                          | PM10                   | SO2                              | NO2                              | O3                       | CO                       |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
| Mean (SD)                                                           | 46.57 (6)                      | 54.47 (7)                      | 89.45 (23)             | 50.21 (17)                       | 36.78 (12)                       | 111.92 (160)            | 1481.64 (770)            |
| Median                                                              | 44.92                          | 52.01                          | 90.50                  | 50.50                            | 35.25                            | 45.50                    | 1328.00                  |
| Min                                                                 | 38.15                          | 46.04                          | 47.75                  | 14.75                            | 10.50                            | 15.00                    | 362.00                   |
| Max                                                                 | 56.20                          | 65.58                          | 132.50                 | 79.00                            | 55.00                            | 574.00                   | 3527.75                  |
| Interquartile widthb                                                | 11.64                          | 11.63                          | 33.00                  | 25.25                            | 13.75                            | 63.69                    | 871.75                   |
| NAAQSc                                                             | –                              | 35                             | 70                     | 60                               | 40                               | 160                      | –                        |
| % of measurements above                                             | –                              | 100                            | 77.78                  | 29.63                            | 40.74                            | 18.51                    | –                        |
| WHO guidelined                                                      | –                              | 10                             | 20                     | 20                               | 40                               | 100                      | –                        |
| % of >WHO                                                          | –                              | 100                            | 100                    | 96.30                            | 40.74                            | 18.51                    | –                        |

aPM1 and PM2.5 are from 94 schools and PM10, SO, NO, O, and CO are from 27 districts.
bInterquartile width (IQw): range from 25th to 75th percentile of district-specific concentrations.
cNAAQS: Annual National ambient air quality standard of China in 2012. No guidelines for PM1 and CO.
dWorld Health Organization 2005 air quality guidelines. No guidelines for PM1 and CO.
NAAQS indicates national ambient air quality standard; SD = standard deviation.

relationship between PM1 and PM2.5 exposure on prevalence of disorders and PM1, PM2.5, PM10, NO, and O3, as observed by the significant trend test. Additionally, previous literature has reported that environmental tobacco smoke produces a large quantity of PM, where passive exposure is associated with adverse health. For this reason, Supplementary Table S1 examines the association between passive smoking and sleep disorder. Table 3. Associations of 4-year average concentrations of air pollutants per interquartile range with sleep disorder and sleep disorder symptoms related to yearly exposure to ambient air pollution stratified by gender

| IQR of exposure (μg/m3) | Males OR | 95% CI | Females OR | 95% CI | Overall OR | 95% CI |
|--------------------------|----------|--------|------------|--------|------------|--------|
| Sleep disorder            |          |        |            |        |            |        |
| PM1                      | 11.6     | 1.55   | 1.36–1.76  | 1.50   | 1.30–1.72  | 1.53   | 1.38–1.69 |
| PM2.5                    | 11.6     | 1.50   | 1.33–1.69  | 1.44   | 1.26–1.63  | 1.47   | 1.34–1.62 |
| PM10                     | 35.5     | 1.18   | 1.01–1.37  | 1.16   | 0.99–1.35  | 1.17   | 1.02–1.34 |
| SO2                      | 21.5     | 1.15   | 1.01–1.32  | 1.12   | 0.98–1.29  | 1.14   | 1.01–1.28 |
| NO2                      | 13.3     | 1.13   | 1.01–1.26  | 1.12   | 1.00–1.25  | 1.12   | 1.02–1.24 |
| O3                       | 29.5     | 1.01   | 1.00–1.03  | 1.02   | 1.00–1.04  | 1.02   | 1.00–1.03 |
| CO                       | 563.4    | 1.03   | 0.98–1.09  | 1.01   | 0.95–1.06  | 1.02   | 0.97–1.07 |
| SWTD                     |          |        |            |        |            |        |
| PM1                      | 11.6     | 1.33   | 1.19–1.49  | 1.49   | 1.33–1.68  | 1.41   | 1.30–1.53 |
| PM2.5                    | 11.6     | 1.29   | 1.16–1.44  | 1.44   | 1.29–1.60  | 1.36   | 1.26–1.47 |
| PM10                     | 35.5     | 1.11   | 0.97–1.26  | 1.14   | 1.00–1.30  | 1.12   | 1.01–1.25 |
| SO2                      | 21.5     | 1.08   | 0.96–1.21  | 1.04   | 0.93–1.16  | 1.06   | 0.96–1.17 |
| NO2                      | 13.3     | 1.08   | 0.98–1.19  | 1.04   | 0.95–1.15  | 1.06   | 0.98–1.16 |
| O3                       | 29.5     | 1.01   | 1.00–1.03  | 1.01   | 1.00–1.03  | 1.01   | 1.00–1.03 |
| CO                       | 563.4    | 1.00   | 0.95–1.05  | 1.02   | 0.97–1.07  | 1.01   | 0.97–1.05 |
| DIMS                     |          |        |            |        |            |        |
| PM1                      | 11.6     | 1.41   | 1.22–1.63  | 1.25   | 1.08–1.43  | 1.32   | 1.19–1.47 |
| PM2.5                    | 11.6     | 1.36   | 1.19–1.55  | 1.21   | 1.07–1.38  | 1.28   | 1.16–1.41 |
| PM10                     | 35.5     | 1.12   | 1.01–1.42  | 1.14   | 0.96–1.35  | 1.17   | 1.00–1.37 |
| SO2                      | 21.5     | 1.18   | 1.01–1.37  | 1.11   | 0.95–1.29  | 1.14   | 0.99–1.31 |
| NO2                      | 13.3     | 1.10   | 0.96–1.25  | 1.10   | 0.96–1.25  | 1.10   | 0.97–1.24 |
| O3                       | 29.5     | 1.02   | 1.00–1.04  | 1.01   | 0.99–1.03  | 1.01   | 1.00–1.03 |
| CO                       | 563.4    | 1.00   | 0.94–1.06  | 0.98   | 0.92–1.05  | 0.99   | 0.94–1.05 |
| DOES                     |          |        |            |        |            |        |
| PM1                      | 11.6     | 1.47   | 1.28–1.68  | 1.36   | 1.20–1.54  | 1.43   | 1.30–1.58 |
| PM2.5                    | 11.6     | 1.42   | 1.25–1.61  | 1.33   | 1.18–1.49  | 1.39   | 1.27–1.52 |
| PM10                     | 35.5     | 1.05   | 0.92–1.21  | 1.10   | 0.96–1.25  | 1.08   | 0.95–1.21 |
| SO2                      | 21.5     | 1.14   | 1.01–1.28  | 1.08   | 0.96–1.21  | 1.11   | 1.00–1.22 |
| NO2                      | 13.3     | 1.02   | 0.92–1.13  | 1.08   | 0.98–1.20  | 1.05   | 0.96–1.15 |
| O3                       | 29.5     | 1.01   | 0.99–1.03  | 1.01   | 0.99–1.02  | 1.01   | 0.99–1.02 |
| CO                       | 563.4    | 1.04   | 1.00–1.09  | 1.00   | 0.95–1.04  | 1.02   | 0.98–1.06 |
| DA                       |          |        |            |        |            |        |
| PM1                      | 11.6     | 1.36   | 1.21–1.54  | 1.44   | 1.26–1.64  | 1.40   | 1.28–1.53 |
| PM2.5                    | 11.6     | 1.33   | 1.19–1.49  | 1.40   | 1.24–1.58  | 1.36   | 1.25–1.48 |
| PM10                     | 35.5     | 1.13   | 1.00–1.28  | 1.20   | 1.06–1.37  | 1.16   | 1.05–1.28 |
| SO2                      | 21.5     | 1.08   | 0.97–1.21  | 1.17   | 1.04–1.31  | 1.12   | 1.03–1.23 |
| NO2                      | 13.3     | 1.05   | 0.95–1.15  | 1.07   | 0.97–1.20  | 1.06   | 0.98–1.15 |
| O3                       | 29.5     | 1.01   | 0.99–1.03  | 1.02   | 1.01–1.04  | 1.02   | 1.01–1.03 |
| CO                       | 563.4    | 1.01   | 0.97–1.06  | 1.02   | 0.98–1.07  | 1.02   | 0.98–1.06 |
| SHY                      |          |        |            |        |            |        |
| PM1                      | 11.6     | 1.28   | 1.15–1.42  | 1.19   | 1.04–1.37  | 1.24   | 1.14–1.35 |
| PM2.5                    | 11.6     | 1.26   | 1.14–1.39  | 1.18   | 1.04–1.34  | 1.22   | 1.13–1.33 |
| PM10                     | 35.5     | 1.05   | 0.88–1.24  | 1.20   | 1.00–1.43  | 1.10   | 0.94–1.30 |
| SO2                      | 21.5     | 0.99   | 0.85–1.15  | 1.03   | 0.88–1.21  | 1.01   | 0.87–1.16 |
| NO2                      | 13.3     | 1.02   | 0.90–1.16  | 1.20   | 1.05–1.37  | 1.09   | 0.96–1.22 |
| O3                       | 29.5     | 1.00   | 0.98–1.02  | 1.03   | 1.01–1.05  | 1.01   | 1.00–1.03 |
| CO                       | 563.4    | 1.00   | 0.95–1.06  | 1.03   | 0.96–1.09  | 1.01   | 0.96–1.07 |
| SBD                      |          |        |            |        |            |        |
| PM1                      | 11.6     | 1.09   | 0.98–1.22  | 1.20   | 1.06–1.36  | 1.14   | 1.04–1.24 |
| PM2.5                    | 11.6     | 1.09   | 0.98–1.20  | 1.19   | 1.06–1.33  | 1.13   | 1.04–1.22 |
| PM10                     | 35.5     | 0.97   | 0.86–1.09  | 1.08   | 0.94–1.23  | 1.01   | 0.91–1.13 |
| SO2                      | 21.5     | 1.02   | 0.92–1.13  | 1.10   | 0.99–1.23  | 1.06   | 0.96–1.16 |
| NO2                      | 13.3     | 1.02   | 0.93–1.11  | 1.04   | 0.94–1.14  | 1.03   | 0.95–1.11 |
| O3                       | 29.5     | 0.99   | 0.98–1.01  | 1.01   | 1.00–1.03  | 1.00   | 0.99–1.01 |
| CO                       | 563.4    | 0.97   | 0.94–1.01  | 1.00   | 0.96–1.04  | 0.98   | 0.95–1.02 |

IQR = interquartile range; OR = odds ratio; CI = confidence interval; PM1 = particle with aerodynamic diameter ≤ 1μm; PM2.5 = particle with aerodynamic diameter ≤2.5 μm; PM10 = particle with aerodynamic diameter ≤ 10μm; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; NO2 = nitrogen dioxide; O3 = ozone; CO = carbon monoxide; SWTD = sleep–wake transition disorders; DIMS = disorders of initiating and maintaining sleep; DOES = disorders of excessive somnolence; DA = disorders of arousal; SHY = sleep hyperhidrosis; SBD = sleep-breathing disorders. Adjusted for age, gender, parental education, low birth weight, premature birth, breastfeeding, income, passive smoking exposure, home coal use, house pet, and district. Estimates were scaled to the interquartile range for each pollutant. | Quintile | Adjusted OR | PM levels (ug/mL) | p for trend |
|----------|-------------|--------------------|-------------|
| 1        | 4.02        |                    | <0.001      |
| 2        | 2.43        |                    |             |
| 3        |             |                    |             |
| 4        |             |                    |             |
| 5        |             |                    |             |

Figure 1. Association between prevalence of sleep disorder (%) and air pollutants in children. (A) for PM; (B) for PM 2.5; (C) for PM 10. p-Values for trend were calculated using categories representing the median value of corresponding quintile (Q1: quintile 1; Q2: quintile 2; Q3: quintile 3; Q4: quintile 4; Q5: quintile 5).

A
```
p for trend <0.001
```
```
p for trend <0.001
```
```
p for trend =0.017
```
```
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5
```
```
0.0
```

B
```
p for trend =0.167
```
```
p for trend =0.029
```
```
p for trend =0.038
```
```
p for trend =0.762
```
```
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5
```
```
0.0
```

Figure 2. Association between air pollutants and sleep disorder. (A) for PM, PM 2.5, PM 10; (B) for SO2, NO2, O3, CO. The data are expressed as odds ratios and 95% confidence interval adjusting for age, gender, parental education, low birth weight, premature birth, breastfeeding, income, passive smoking exposure, home coal use, house pet, and district. p-Values for trend were calculated using categories representing the median value of corresponding quintile (Q1: quintile 1; Q2: quintile 2; Q3: quintile 3; Q4: quintile 4; Q5: quintile 5). Table 4. Estimates for sleep score with 95% confidence interval per interquartile range for yearly exposure to ambient air pollutants stratified by gender

| IQR of exposure (μg/m3) | Males |  |  | Females |  |  | Overall |  |  |
|--------------------------|-------|----------------|----------------|---------|----------------|----------------|---------|----------------|----------------|
|                          | β     | 95% CI         |                | β       | 95% CI         |                | β       | 95% CI         |                |
| Total sleep score        |       |                |                |         |                |                |         |                |                |
| PM 1                     | 11.6  | 1.001          | 0.772, 1.230   | 1.204   | 0.980, 1.428   |                | 1.105   | 0.945, 1.266   |                |
| PM 2.5                   | 11.6  | 0.900          | 0.683, 1.117   | 1.094   | 0.883, 1.306   |                | 0.999   | 0.847, 1.150   |                |
| PM 10                    | 35.5  | 0.300          | 0.093, 0.507   | 0.504   | 0.302, 0.706   |                | 0.403   | 0.258, 0.548   |                |
| SO 2                     | 21.5  | 0.154          | −0.024, 0.332  | 0.252   | 0.080, 0.425   |                | 0.205   | 0.081, 0.329   |                |
| NO 2                     | 13.3  | 0.065          | −0.085, 0.215  | 0.198   | 0.050, 0.345   |                | 0.132   | 0.027, 0.240   |                |
| O 3                      | 29.5  | 0.050          | 0.021, 0.078   | 0.078   | 0.052, 0.104   |                | 0.065   | 0.046, 0.084   |                |
| CO                       | 563.4 | 0.043          | −0.026, 0.112  | 0.109   | 0.042, 0.176   |                | 0.076   | 0.028, 0.125   |                |
| SWTD                     |       |                |                |         |                |                |         |                |                |
| PM 1                     | 11.6  | 0.746          | 0.523, 0.970   | 0.944   | 0.717, 1.172   |                | 0.848   | 0.689, 1.008   |                |
| PM 2.5                   | 11.6  | 0.688          | 0.476, 0.899   | 0.891   | 0.676, 1.105   |                | 0.791   | 0.640, 0.942   |                |
| PM 10                    | 35.5  | 0.370          | 0.168, 0.572   | 0.504   | 0.299, 0.709   |                | 0.439   | 0.295, 0.583   |                |
| SO 2                     | 21.5  | 0.081          | −0.093, 0.254  | −0.017  | −0.193, 0.158  |                | 0.034   | −0.089, 0.157  |                |
| NO 2                     | 13.3  | 0.109          | −0.037, 0.255  | 0.132   | −0.018, 0.281  |                | 0.123   | 0.018, 0.227   |                |
| O 3                      | 29.5  | 0.054          | 0.026, 0.082   | 0.074   | 0.047–1.000    |                | 0.065   | 0.046, 0.084   |                |
| CO                       | 563.4 | 0.067          | −0.001, 0.135  | 0.175   | 0.107, 0.242   |                | 0.121   | 0.073, 0.169   |                |
| DIMS                     |       |                |                |         |                |                |         |                |                |
| PM 1                     | 11.6  | 0.943          | 0.719, 1.168   | 0.993   | 0.763, 1.223   |                | 0.971   | 0.810, 1.132   |                |
| PM 2.5                   | 11.6  | 0.821          | 0.609, 1.033   | 0.868   | 0.651, 1.085   |                | 0.846   | 0.694, 0.998   |                |
| PM 10                    | 35.5  | 0.490          | 0.287, 0.693   | 0.539   | 0.331, 0.746   |                | 0.515   | 0.370, 0.660   |                |
| SO 2                     | 21.5  | 0.195          | 0.021, 0.369   | 0.408   | 0.230, 0.585   |                | 0.302   | 0.178, 0.427   |                |
| NO 2                     | 13.3  | 0.114          | −0.033, 0.261  | 0.203   | 0.052, 0.354   |                | 0.160   | 0.054, 0.265   |                |
| O 3                      | 29.5  | 0.052          | 0.024, 0.079   | 0.057   | 0.031, 0.084   |                | 0.055   | 0.036, 0.074   |                |
| CO                       | 563.4 | −0.005         | −0.073, 0.063  | 0.019   | −0.050, 0.088  |                | 0.007   | −0.041, 0.055   |                |
| DOES                     |       |                |                |         |                |                |         |                |                |
| PM 1                     | 11.6  | 0.737          | 0.518, 0.956   | 0.894   | 0.670, 1.118   |                | 0.817   | 0.661, 0.974   |                |
| PM 2.5                   | 11.6  | 0.666          | 0.459, 0.872   | 0.800   | 0.588, 1.011   |                | 0.734   | 0.586, 0.882   |                |
| PM 10                    | 35.5  | −0.025         | −0.222, 0.173  | 0.087   | −0.116, 0.289  |                | 0.033   | −0.109, 0.174  |                |
| SO 2                     | 21.5  | 0.197          | 0.027, 0.367   | 0.203   | 0.031, 0.376   |                | 0.201   | 0.080, 0.322   |                |
| NO 2                     | 13.3  | −0.021         | −0.164, 0.123  | 0.058   | −0.089, 0.205  |                | 0.020   | −0.083, 0.122   |                |
| O 3                      | 29.5  | 0.019          | −0.008, 0.046  | 0.027   | 0.001, 0.053   |                | 0.024   | 0.005, 0.042   |                |
| CO                       | 563.4 | 0.073          | 0.007, 0.140   | 0.074   | 0.007, 0.141   |                | 0.073   | 0.026, 0.121   |                |
| DA                       |       |                |                |         |                |                |         |                |                |
| PM 1                     | 11.6  | 0.379          | 0.147, 0.612   | 0.701   | 0.478, 0.924   |                | 0.539   | 0.378, 0.700   |                |
| PM 2.5                   | 11.6  | 0.350          | 0.130, 0.569   | 0.665   | 0.455, 0.875   |                | 0.506   | 0.354, 0.658   |                |
| PM 10                    | 35.5  | 0.074          | −0.136, 0.283  | 0.383   | 0.182, 0.584   |                | 0.227   | 0.082, 0.372   |                |
| SO 2                     | 21.5  | 0.034          | −0.146, 0.214  | 0.268   | 0.096, 0.439   |                | 0.151   | 0.027, 0.276   |                |
| NO 2                     | 13.3  | 0.013          | −0.139, 0.165  | 0.201   | 0.054, 0.347   |                | 0.105   | 0.00, 0.211    |                |
| O 3                      | 29.5  | 0.016          | −0.012, 0.045  | 0.067   | 0.042, 0.093   |                | 0.043   | 0.024, 0.063   |                |
| CO                       | 563.4 | −0.037         | −0.107, 0.033  | 0.033   | −0.033, 0.100  |                | −0.002  | −0.050, 0.047  |                |
| SHY                      |       |                |                |         |                |                |         |                |                |
| PM 1                     | 11.6  | 0.859          | 0.620, 1.099   | 0.910   | 0.708, 1.113   |                | 0.887   | 0.730, 1.044   |                |
| PM 2.5                   | 11.6  | 0.818          | 0.592, 1.045   | 0.865   | 0.674, 1.056   |                | 0.843   | 0.695, 0.992   |                |
| PM 10                    | 35.5  | 0.275          | 0.058, 0.491   | 0.494   | 0.312, 0.677   |                | 0.385   | 0.243, 0.527   |                |
| SO 2                     | 21.5  | −0.244         | −0.430, −0.058 | −0.064  | −0.220, 0.092  |                | −0.152  | −0.274, −0.031 |                |
| NO 2                     | 13.3  | 0.032          | −0.124, 0.189  | 0.305   | 0.172, 0.438   |                | 0.167   | 0.064, 0.270   |                |
| O 3                      | 29.5  | 0.064          | 0.034, 0.093   | 0.103   | 0.079, 0.126   |                | 0.085   | 0.066, 0.104   |                |
| CO                       | 563.4 | 0.115          | 0.042, 0.187   | 0.145   | 0.084, 0.205   |                | 0.131   | 0.083, 0.178   |                |
| SBD                      |       |                |                |         |                |                |         |                |                |
| PM 1                     | 11.6  | 0.093          | −0.146, 0.333  | 0.199   | −0.012, 0.409  |                | 0.146   | −0.014, 0.305   |                |
| PM 2.5                   | 11.6  | 0.045          | −0.182, 0.271  | 0.146   | −0.053, 0.345  |                | 0.095   | −0.056, 0.246   |                |
| PM 10                    | 35.5  | −0.204         | −0.420, 0.012  | −0.010  | −0.200, 0.180  |                | −0.107  | −0.252, 0.037  |                |
| SO 2                     | 21.5  | 0.205          | 0.020, 0.391   | 0.225   | 0.063, 0.387   |                | 0.216   | 0.093, 0.340   |                |
| NO 2                     | 13.3  | −0.063         | −0.220, 0.093  | −0.041  | −0.179, 0.097  |                | −0.052  | −0.157, 0.052  |                |
| O 3                      | 29.5  | −0.026         | −0.056, 0.003  | −0.001  | −0.025, 0.024  |                | −0.012  | −0.032, 0.007  |                |
| CO                       | 563.4 | −0.095         | −0.168, −0.023 | −0.054  | −0.117, 0.009  |                | −0.074  | −0.122, −0.026 |                |

IQR = interquartile range; OR = odds ratio; CI = confidence interval; PM1 = particle with aerodynamic diameter ≤ 1μm; PM2.5 = particle with aerodynamic diameter ≤2.5 μm; PM10 = particle with aerodynamic diameter ≤10 μm; SO2 = sulfur dioxide; NO2 = nitrogen dioxide; O3 = ozone; CO = carbon monoxide; SWTD = sleep–wake transition disorders; DIMS = disorders of initiating and maintaining sleep; DOES = disorders of excessive somnolence; DA = disorders of arousal; SHY = sleep hyperhidrosis; SBD = sleep-breathing disorders. Adjusted for age, gender, parental education, low birth weight, premature birth, breastfeeding, income, passive smoking exposure, home coal use, house pet, and district. Estimates were scaled to the interquartile range for each pollutant. Exposure to passive smoking during pregnancy had the strongest association with all sleep-disorder symptoms for both male (ORs ranged from 1.32 to 1.83) and female children (ORs ranged from 1.45 to 1.90), where odds were highest for sleep–wake transition disorders for both. Generally, in the overall group, all exposures to passive smoking were strongly associated with a sleep-disorder symptom other than exposure to passive smoke from father and disorders of arousal (OR 0.92; 95% CI 0.92–1.10).

The estimated relationships of air pollutants per IQR increase retained as a continuous variable on sleep score is shown in Table 4. Exposure to all air pollutants was associated with increased overall total sleep score, with PM1 having the strongest association. The β coefficients of 1.105 for total sleep score among all children show that per 11.6 μg/m3 increase in PM1 resulted in a 1.105 (95% CI 0.945, 1.266) increase of total sleep score. We observed the association between air pollutants and sleep-disorder symptoms were generally greater in females than males. Exposure to PM1 and PM2.5 and disorders of initiating and maintaining sleep had the greatest association for both male and female (PM: 1.001 and 1.204, PM2.5: 0.900 and 1.094, respectively).

This study showed that the prevalence of sleep disorder was 3.9 from our study, which was close to the report in Chinese children from Shenyang city (4.43%), Italian school-age children (4.19%), and lower than the prevalence in Australian children (10.00%). Our major findings indicate an association between exposures to air pollutants and sleep disorder among 59754 children aged 5–17 years. We also observed that gender-specific differences for the effects of ambient air pollutants’ exposures on sleep score were stronger in female than in male children.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to report exposure to air pollution stratified by pollutants and sleep-disorder symptoms. Additionally, this study adds to the limited literature on the association between air pollutants and sleep disorders in children, especially in a developing country. This is also one of few studies evaluating the health effects of PM1 exposure. It is difficult to compare the results of the present study with others because of sparse literature with respect to the effect of exposure to air pollution on sleep disorder. We also observed that exposure to passive smoking during pregnancy had the strongest effect for all sleep-disorder symptoms.

The biological mechanism underlying the effects of air pollution on sleep disorder remains unclear. Previous publications proposed that the influence of air pollution exposure on sleep-disorder breathing is the result of systemic inflammation, disruption of nasal respiratory and olfactory barriers, and pharyngeal inflammatory responses that elevate upper airway resistance and reduce airway patency. Additionally, another study found that exposure to traffic-related air pollution was associated with neurobehavioral function. Studies have found PM2.5 and PM10 can originate from tobacco smoke and exposure to passive smoking is associated with adverse health effects in a dose-response manner.

The present study had some limitations that must be noted. First, this was a cross-sectional study, and the results are therefore unable to prove causation between air pollution and sleep.

| Table 4: Estimated Relationships of Air Pollutants on Sleep Score |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Pollutant | β Coefficient | 95% CI |
|-----------|---------------|--------|
| PM1      | 1.105         | 0.945, 1.266 |
| PM2.5    | 0.900         | -      |
| PM       | 1.001 (male)  | -      |
| PM       | 1.204 (female) | -      | disorder. Second, data were collected from parental report resulting in potential recall bias that may have lower accuracy compared with objective methods such as polysomnography and actigraphy. Third, we did not adjust for noise, as literature suggest is associated with sleep disturbance, making noise a potential confounder. Fourth, 4 year average concentrations were used as a surrogate for long-term exposure for all pollutants; however, because of specified placement of air monitoring stations, data collected are more likely to reflect background air pollutant levels, thus our results may overestimate the adverse effects of air pollution. Finally, unmeasured residual factors such as neighborhood characteristics and diet have potential to be confounders of the relationship.

Our study limitations are offset by notable strengths including large representative sample size of children. We are also one of few studies to evaluate PM1 exposure, particularly among children. This study also stratified sleep disorder by symptoms, allowing for determining strength in association with symptoms and compared across different air pollutants. Additionally, air pollution concentrations were measured across seven cities providing a better comprehension on the association between exposures to air pollutants on sleep disorder. For this reason, this study provides a strong reasonable assessment for the influence exposure to air pollutants have on sleep disorder in children. Finally, SDSC is a cross-culturally validated instrument, which has been translated and validated among Chinese children.

Conclusion
This is the largest study on the effect of air pollutants on sleep disorder and adds to the limited studies exploring the association among children. Findings from the present study suggest that exposure to air pollutants increases the odds of sleep disorder and sleep-disorder symptoms in children. The association between exposures to air pollutants on sleep-disorder symptoms was largely consistent for both genders. Additionally, because we observed that exposure to PM1 and PM2.5 was generally strongest and 100% of measurements were above the National Ambient Air Quality Standard of China and WHO guidelines, our findings have large public health implications and point to the need to make reducing exposure to air pollutants a public health priority.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary material are available at SLEEP online.

Funding
This research was supported by grants from the National Key R&D Program of China (2016YFC0207000), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (81673127, 81673128), the fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (17ykzd14, 17ykpy16, 16ykzd02), the Guangdong Province Natural Science Foundation (2016A030313342, 2017A050501062), and Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou (201807010032; 201803010054). The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the funding source. The funding source had no role in the design, data collection, data analysis, interpretation of findings, or decision to publish. The corresponding author and lead author had full access to all data in this study. The corresponding author had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication. 18. Bruni O, et al. The Sleep Disturbance Scale for Children (SDSC). Construction and validation of an instrument to evaluate sleep disturbances in childhood and adolescence. J Sleep Res. 1996;5(4):251–261.
19. Huang MM, et al. Validation of the sleep disturbance scale for children and prevalence of parent-reported sleep disorder symptoms in Chinese children. Sleep Med. 2014;15(8):923–928.
20. Tan E, et al. Sleep hygiene intervention for youth aged 10 to 18 years with problematic sleep: a before-after pilot study. BMC Pediatr. 2012;12(1):721.
21. State Environmental Protection Administration of China. Standardized Environmental Monitoring and Analysis Methods. Beijing; 1992.
22. Qian Z, et al. Part 2. Association of daily mortality with ambient air pollution, and effect modification by extremely high temperature in Wuhan, China. Res Rep Health Eff Inst. 2010;(154):91–217.
23. Chen G, et al. Estimating spatiotemporal distribution of PM1 concentrations in China with satellite remote sensing, meteorology, and land use information. Environ Pollut. 2018;233:1086–1094.
24. Yang BY, et al. Ambient air pollution in relation to diabetes and glucose-homoeostasis markers in China: a cross-sectional study with findings from the 33 Communities Chinese Health Study. Lancet Planet Health. 2018;2(2):e64–e73.
25. Kant N, et al. Particulate matter in second-hand smoke emitted from different cigarette sizes and types of the brand vogue mainly smoked by women. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2016;13(8):799.
26. Gerber A, et al. Brand cigarillos–A cheap and less harmful alternative to cigarettes? Particulate matter emissions suggest otherwise. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2015;12(1):428–438.
27. Iffland Y, et al. High particulate matter emission from additive-free Natural American Spirit cigarettes. Springerplus. 2016;5(1):1958.
28. Camfferman D, et al. sleep, and behavior in children. J Clin Sleep Med. 2010;6(6):581–588.
29. Esposito M, et al. Hypersomnia in children affected by migraine without aura: a questionnaire-based case-control study. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2013;9:289–294.
30. Marshall NS, et al. Completely scoobied: the confusing world of temperature and pollution effects on sleep apnoea. Eur Respir J. 2015;46(5):1251–1254.
31. Tamanyan K, et al. Risk factors for obstructive sleep apnoea in Australian children. J Paediatr Child Health. 2016;52(5):512–517.
32. Kaditis AG, et al. Sleep-disordered breathing in 3,680 Greek children. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2004;37(6):499–509.
33. Montaldo L, et al. Association between exposure to secondhand smoke and sleep bruxism in children: a randomised control study. Tob Control. 2012;21(4):392–395.
34. Sabanayagam C, et al. The association between active smoking, smokeless tobacco, second-hand smoke exposure and insufficient sleep. Sleep Med. 2011;12(1):7–11.
35. Hu LW, et al. Effects of in utero and postnatal exposure to secondhand smoke on lung function by gender and asthma status: the Seven Northeastern Cities (SNEC) Study. Respiration. 2017;93(3):189–197.
36. Fifer WP, et al. Effects of alcohol and smoking during pregnancy on infant autonomic control. Dev Psychobiol. 2009;51(3):234–242.
37. Polanska K, et al. Environmental tobacco smoke exposure during pregnancy and child neurodevelopment. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2017;14(7):796.
38. Calderón-Garcidueñas L, et al. Pediatric respiratory and systemic effects of chronic air pollution exposure: nose, lung, heart, and brain pathology. Toxicol Pathol. 2007;35(1):154–162.
39. Freire C, et al. Association of traffic-related air pollution with cognitive development in children. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2010;64(3):223–228.
40. Muzet A. Environmental noise, sleep and health. Sleep Med Rev. 2007;11(2):135–142. 