# ANALYSIS OF DAYTIME SLEEPINIESS IN ADOLESCENTS BY THE PEDIATRIC DAYTIME SLEEPINESS SCALE: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW

## ABSTRACT
**Objective:** To systematically review the use of the Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale (PDSS) in the analysis of daytime sleepiness in children and adolescents.
**Data source:** The electronic databases PubMed and SciELO were consulted between 2003 and 2015. As inclusion criterion, studies were considered in English, Spanish and Portuguese, original articles of any type of design, articles with a sample of children and/or adolescents, articles that used the PDSS. Duplicate articles, articles with no relation to the theme, articles with another investigated population, and articles that the parents answered the instrument for their children were excluded. To find the material with these features, the terms “Daytime sleepiness” AND “adolescents” and “Daytime sleepiness” AND “children” were used in the searches. In addition, the descriptor “Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale” was used to filter more specifically.
**Data synthesis:** Initially, 986 studies related to daytime sleepiness were identified. Considering the inclusion criteria, we analyzed 26 studies composed of 18,458 subjects aged 0 to 37 years. The diurnal sleepiness score ranged from 6.7±0.6 to 25.7±0.6 points. In general, all included studies investigated other sleep variables in addition to daytime sleepiness, such as: sleep duration, sleep quality, sleep hygiene or sleep disorders (narcolepsy and cataplexy), respiratory disorders, neurological and developmental disorders.
**Conclusions:** There was a moderate use of PDSS to evaluate daytime sleepiness. This instrument allows the monitoring of factors that influence excessive daytime sleepiness in children and adolescents.
**Keywords:** Disorders of excessive somnolence; Evaluation; Sleep; Adolescent health; Adolescent.

## RESUMO
**Objetivo:** Revisar de modo sistemático a utilização da Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale (PDSS) na análise da sonolência diurna em crianças e adolescentes.
**Fontes de dados:** Foram consultadas as bases de dados eletrônicas PubMed e SciELO, no período delimitado entre 2003 e 2015. Como critério de inclusão, foram considerados estudos em inglês, espanhol e português; artigos originais de qualquer tipo de escopo, com amostra de crianças e/ou adolescentes e que utilizaram a PDSS. Foram excluídos artigos duplicados, sem relação com o tema, com outra população investigada, bem como aqueles em que os pais responderam o instrumento pelos seus filhos. Para encontrar o material dentro desses critérios, foram utilizados nas buscas os seguintes termos: “Daytime sleepiness” AND “adolescents” e “Daytime sleepiness” AND “children”. Além disso, utilizou‑se o descritor “Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale” para fazer uma filtragem mais específica.
**Síntese dos dados:** Inicialmente, identificaram‑se 986 pesquisas relacionadas à sonolência diurna. Considerando os critérios de inclusão, foram analisados 26 estudos compostos por 18.458 sujeitos com idades de 0 a 37 anos que responderam à PDSS. A pontuação da escala da sonolência diurna variou de 6,7±0,6 a 25,7±4. Em geral, todos os estudos incluídos investigaram, além da sonolência diurna, outras variáveis do sono, como: duração, qualidade, higiene ou distúrbios do sono (narcolepsia e cataplexia), patologias respiratórias, neurológicas e do desenvolvimento.
**Conclusões:** Verificou‑se moderada utilização da PDSS para avaliar a sonolência diurna. Esse instrumento permite o acompanhamento de fatores que influenciam a sonolência diurna excessiva em crianças e adolescentes.
**Palavras‑chave:** Distúrbios do sono por sonolência Excessiva; Avaliação; Sono; Saúde do adolescente; Adolescente. # Systematic review of PDSS in adolescents

## INTRODUCTION
Sleep, which is a basic biological process that is essential for the growth and healthy development of children and adolescents, is considered an important factor for the health of young people. Currently, research in this area has investigated its association both with the proper functioning of cognitive and psychological functions, as well as with metabolic health and obesity. In addition, poor sleep quality has direct repercussions on daytime activities performed by children and adolescents.

Poor sleep quality may lead to excessive sleepiness during the day, with daytime sleepiness being one of the main consequences related to sleep disturbances. It is characterized by the increased need for napping during the day and has a close relation with declining school performance and with a negative perception of quality of life.

One of the influences in increasing sleep need refers to the biopsychosocial changes that occur in puberty. Adolescent sleep is characterized by a delay in the timing of sleep due to the innumerable processes of biological, psychic and social changes characteristic of this phase of human development. This delayed sleep onset impairs adaptation to social hours – especially at the end of this period – making it difficult for teenagers to stay awake in situations in which they are required to, such as during school hours, for example. These situations need to be better investigated since daily routines, school and extracurricular schedules of adolescents, low level of physical activity, high values of body mass index (BMI), nocturnal awakening and respiratory problems are predictors of pathologies associated with daytime sleepiness.

The most accurate method for assessing daytime sleepiness is the Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT). Considered a gold standard, it is performed in laboratory settings and aims to evaluate how quickly a patient falls asleep in a soporific situation, as well to verify abnormal transitions between wakefulness and REM sleep. However, it is a high-cost resource with difficult implementation in field research. Thus, the need to quantify daytime sleepiness subjectively through self-reporting measures is understandable. The most widely used instrument for this purpose is the Epworth Sleepiness Scale. However, in its original version, such scale is suitable only for the adult population. Moreover, even without validation for children and adolescents, with the exclusion of questions that consider situations that do not represent the daily life of these populations, the Epworth Scale has already been used in a modified way. In this context, the Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale (PDSS) has been recently validated and translated into Portuguese by Felden et al. to be used in the investigation of daytime sleepiness in Brazilian children and adolescents. It is a self-assessment instrument that describes some daily life situations related to sleep habits, waking time and sleep problems.

Therefore, this work aimed to systematically review the use of PDSS in the analysis of daytime sleepiness in children and adolescents. Thus, it also aimed to make progress in research, seeking to identify general scores observed, associated factors and main results. By doing so, we were able to group data to support the viability of application of the PDSS instrument in research.

## SOURCES OF DATA
We selected PubMed and SciELO electronic databases to perform the searches. The reasons for this choice included good criteria for periodic evaluation and an impact factor measurement based on international standards of scientific communication and a variety of articles in the area of health. In order to find studies that used PDSS specifically for children and adolescents, we initially typed the keywords “daytime sleepiness”, “adolescents” and “children” combined with the Boolean operator “AND”. In addition, in order to filter the search, we used the descriptor “Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale” according to Figure 1.

To make our search more specific, we delimited the date (2003-2015) and only selected works involving human subjects. Inclusion criteria for the present review included:
1. Texts in English, Spanish or Portuguese;
2. Original articles, all designs eligible;
3. A sample consisting of children and adolescents;
4. Daytime sleepiness evaluated with PDSS.

An article selection process to compose the review occurred in four stages:
1. Database search;
2. Title review;
3. Title skimming;
4. Reading articles in full.

Initially, we excluded duplicate studies and those that clearly were not related to the subject of the present review – for example, those evaluating a different population (teachers, workers, and drivers). We also excluded studies in which parents answered the questionnaire for their children. All the steps were carried out by two evaluators, who discussed the suitability of the articles according to the established criteria. In cases of disagreement, a third evaluator was consulted.

To assess article quality, we used the rating scale proposed by Downs and Black, consisting of 27 questions that estimate communication, external validity, internal validity (bias and DATA SUMMARY
We found 986 studies related to daytime sleepiness in children and adolescents, as described in Figure 1. Of these, 252 articles were excluded because they were duplicated, leaving 734 studies for title skimming. After the titles were read, 65 were excluded because they did not fit the inclusion criteria. Thus, 669 studies were selected for abstract reading and, of these, 548 abstracts were excluded because they did not present an evaluation of daytime sleepiness in their methods and/or results. Therefore, 121 articles were left for reading in full. Of these, 98 were excluded because they did not use the instrument analyzed in the present review. Thus, 23 articles met the inclusion criteria and other 4 articles were selected from the references. Of these 27 articles, 1 was excluded because the result was not in accordance with the objective of the present review. Therefore, 26 studies were included and completely analyzed in our study. Figure 2 shows the selection process of the articles.

Most articles (n = 14) were published in recent years (2012-2015). Sample size varied from 22-7,556 children and adolescents of both sexes. All the studies included in the review were carried out outside Brazil, since Brazilian surveys did not meet the criteria established for the present review.

The quality evaluation of the selected studies was described in Table 1. The median score, according to the Downs and Black criteria, was 12.2 (with a minimum of 9 and a maximum of 15 points). The mean score of the analyzed studies was 11 ± 2 points. Regarding the methodological evaluation, the questions related to the communication domain (clarity in the description of objectives, confounding variables, probability values) were those that best met the criteria proposed for quality analysis, presenting higher score averages. However, the questions that indicated external validity were those that presented greater methodological limitations, with low inclusion rates. It should be noted that of the 26 articles, only 4 presented statistical power; 6, confounding factors; and 8, adjustments of confounding analysis.

Most of the studies used PDSS as an instrument to assess sleepiness related to sleep disorders (respiratory, neurological, and developmental disorders) and to assess sleepiness side effect monitoring in pharmacological treatments. In some studies, the

Descriptors                           Database            Results
“Daytime sleepiness”                       PubMed                 539
and adolescents                            SciELO                  7
Total
“Daytime sleepiness”                       PubMed                 411    986
and children                            SciELO                  8

PubMed                  20
“Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness”
SciELO                  1

Figure 1 Database Search Strategy. # Systematic review of PDSS in adolescents

authors applied the scale to healthy children and adolescents. Scale scores ranged from 6.7 ± 0.6-25.7 ± 4.6, showing in some studies (n = 6) a tendency for excessive daytime sleepiness. Among the studies, 15 performed experimental research, evaluating groups (experimental and control) to identify the differences between the diseases and daytime sleepiness in participants.

Table 2 shows designs, investigated factors and means, and standard deviation of the sum of the PDSS questions of all the groups surveyed. Noting that the instrument does not have cut-off points for classification, the studies considered the mean of the scale score.

All studies included investigated, in addition to daytime sleepiness, other sleep variables such as sleep duration, sleep quality, sleep hygiene or sleep disorders. In contrast, sleep disorders (narcolepsy and cataplexy) were the most prominent in comparison to respiratory diseases (breathing problems, obstructive sleep apnea syndrome) and neurological and developmental disorders (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder). The results of each study are shown in Table 3.

## DISCUSSION

Experiencing somnolence events during the day is natural. However, the worsening of this behavior can lead to unsatisfactory levels of sleep and related disorders, which can be characterized as excessive daytime sleepiness. This disorder is one of the most frequent complaints related to sleep, affecting between 10-25% of the population. According to the literature, both the difficulty in staying awake and alert during the day, and the increased subjective perception of sleep need are characterized as excessive daytime sleepiness. This disorder results in involuntary naps and lapses during sleep. Excessive daytime sleepiness is more likely to occur in monotonous situations of daily living or in situations of risk. It is linked to negative social, professional, and family effects, to a decrease in work and school performance, to low learning outcomes and to reductions in quality of life.

The main factors that contribute to excessive daytime sleepiness are: low duration and poor sleep quality, irregular sleep and wake patterns, medical or neurological conditions associated with direct impact on sleep (depression, anxiety, epilepsy, among others), the use of psychoactive substances and the presence of primary hypersomnia. In addition to these, other factors that could contribute to this variable, such as sedentary behavior and physical fitness, require further study. Among the pathological causes and primary sleep disorders are: obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) – with a prevalence of 2% in women and 4% in men; central sleep apnea syndrome; narcolepsy – 0.02-0.18% of the population; idiopathic hypersomnia – 10% of patients suspected of narcolepsy; inadequate sleep hygiene; restless legs syndrome (REM sleep behavioral disorder); periodic limb movement disorder (PLMD); and circadian rhythm disorders (delayed and advanced sleep phase disorders).

There are several ways to assess daytime sleepiness. The main method of objective evaluation of excessive daytime sleepiness is MSLT, which is used for the diagnosis of narcolepsy and idiopathic hypersomnia. However, because it is a high-cost test,

| Studies found in the databases (n=986) | Studies removed by duplication (n=252) |
|-----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| Studies selected for title skimming (n=734) | Studies removed (n=65) |
| Studies selected for abstract reading (n=669) | Studies removed (n=548) |
| Studies selected for full reading (n=121) | Studies removed (n=98) |
| Studies included in the review (n=23) | Studies included from references (n=4) |
| Studies included in the review (n=27) | Studies removed (n=1) |
| Studies for review analysis (n=26) |  |

Figure 2 Flowchart of the selection process of articles that composed the review. subjective evaluations are usually performed through questionnaires and sleep diaries. The advantages of these subjective eval- uations are the low cost and ease of application. Although these types of standardized assessments promote uniformity in the subject’s approach, their use is limited to subjects with intellectual disabilities.

Thus, the studies selected to compose this review used the subjective self-report questionnaire, which includes an adequate

| Authors                                         | Population                                | n    | Age Range (Mean ± Standard Deviation) | Location          | Score (D&B) |
|------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|------|----------------------------------------|-------------------|-------------|
| Maganti et al.18                               | Healthy and epileptic children           | 52   | 8‑18 years                             | USA               | 14          |
| Bruni et al.19                                 | Children and adolescents with Asperger’s Syndrome | 30   | 7‑15 years (12.6 ± 3.7)               | Italy             | 16          |
| Perez‑Chada et al.20                           | Healthy adolescents with respiratory sleep problems | 2,884 | 9‑17 years (13.3 ± 1.4)               | Argentina         | 12          |
| Huang et al.21                                 | Adolescents with narcolepsy and narcolepsy with cataplexy | 26   | 12‑18 years                           | Taiwan            | 13          |
| Hudson et al.22                                | Children with anxiety disorders          | 67   | 7‑12 years                            | Australia         | 21          |
| Moseley et al.23                               | Healthy adolescents                      | 81   | 15.6 ± 0.6 years                      | Australia         | 16          |
| Schneider et al.24                             | Healthy adolescents                      | 469  | 10‑20 years (13.5 ± 2.2)             | Germany           | 11          |
| Spencer et al.25                               | Children and adolescents with ADHD      | 75   | 6‑17 years                            | USA               | 8           |
| Yang et al.26                                  | Healthy adolescents with narcolepsy and obstructive sleep apnea | 331  | 8‑18 years                            | Taiwan            | 11          |
| Cain et al.27                                  | Healthy adolescents                      | 104  | 16.2 ± 0.4 years                      | Australia         | 26          |
| Rhie et al.28                                  | Healthy adolescents                      | 3,201| 6 ‑15 years                           | Korea             | 8           |
| Stavinoha et al.29                             | Children and adults with Cornelia de Lange syndrome | 22   | 1‑37 years                            | USA               | 10          |
| Ishman et al.30                                | Children with allergies and healthy children | 134  | 0‑18 years                            | USA               | 11          |
| Tan et al.31                                   | Healthy adolescents                      | 33   | 12.9 ± 2.2 years                      | N. Zealand        | 15          |
| Esposito et al.32                              | Healthy children with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome | 171  | 7‑12 years                            | Italy             | 12          |
| Esposito et al.33                              | Healthy children with migraines without aura | 576  | 6‑13 years                            | Italy             | 14          |
| Huang et al.34                                 | Adolescents with narcolepsy with cataplexy and schizophrenia | 60   | 18.5 ± 3.0 years                      | USA               | 19          |
| Langberg et al.35                              | Adolescents with ADHD                   | 100  | 10‑14 years                           | USA               | 10          |
| Perez‑Lloret et al.36                          | Healthy adolescents of low socioeconomic level | 1,194| 13‑17 years                           | Argentina         | 14          |
| Vlahandonis et al.37                           | Children with respiratory disorders during sleep | 61   | 12.9 ± 0.2 years                      | Australia         | 10          |
| Huamaní et al.38                               | Healthy adolescents                      | 586  | 13‑17 years (14.2 ± 1.6)             | Peru              | 11          |
| Inocente et al.39                              | Children and adolescents with idiopathic narcolepsy with or without cataplexy | 88   | 5‑17.5 years (11.9 ± 3.1)            | France            | 10          |
| Jarrin et al.40                                | Healthy adolescents                      | 239  | 8‑17 years (12.6 ± 1.9)              | Canada            | 11          |
| Langberg et al.41                              | Adolescents and adults                  | 62   | 17‑30 years                           | USA               | 10          |
| Polos et al.42                                 | Healthy adolescents                      | 7,556| 13.3 ± 2.0 years                      | USA               | 12          |
| Gu et al.43                                    | Healthy adolescents                      | 256  | 11‑17 years (13.7 ± 1.9)             | China             | 14          |

Score (D&B) = Downs and Black criteria. *ADHD: Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. # Systematic review of PDSS in adolescents

Table 2 Design, investigated factors, mean and standard deviation of the Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale of the studies included in the present review.

| First author                     | Design/Investigated factors                                          | Mean and (standard deviation) of the PDSS                      |
|----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| Maganti et al.                   | Cross sectional/epilepsy, SDB and parasomnias                      | Case: 15.5 ± 6.4/Control: 11.9 ± 5.3                          |
| Bruni et al.                     | Cross sectional/autism and sleep architecture                        | 16.5 ± 3.4                                                    |
| Perez‑Chada et al.              | Cross sectional/SP and SDB                                          | Snorers: 16.6 ± 5.9/Non‑snorers: 16.6 ± 5.7                  |
| Huang et al.                     | Case control/narcolepsy, cataplexy, SDB,                           | Treatment with sodium oxybate: 20.9 ± 3.5/                    |
|                                  | baclofen and sodium oxybate                                         | Treatment with baclofen: 21.9 ± 2.9                            |
| Hudson et al.                    | Intervention/anxiety, sleep, fatigue                                | Anxious children: 21.3 ± 5.1/Non‑anxious children: 22.4 ± 5.2 |
| Moseley et al.                   | Intervention/sleep patterns, depression                              | Pre‑intervention: 17.1 ± 4.7/Post‑intervention: 16.7 ± 5.1    |
|                                  | and anxiety                                                         |                                                                |
| Schneider et al.                 | Cross sectional/biological rhythm and daylight                      | Daylight saving time                                           |
|                                  | saving time                                                         | 1st week before: 13.2 ± 5.5/week 3 after: 12.7 ± 5.7         |
| Spencer et al.                   | Longitudinal/fatigue, vital signs, psychiatric                      | 15.0                                                          |
|                                  | disorders, nervous system disorder                                   |                                                                |
| Yang et al.                      | Cross sectional/narcolepsy, OSAS and SDB                           | Control: 14.5 ± 4.3/Narcolepsy: 22.0 ± 4.83/OSAS: 17.61 ± 4.6 |
| Cain et al.                      | Intervention/motivation, depression, sleep                          | Intervention: 17.3 ± 5.6/Control: 14.5 ± 6.3                  |
|                                  | knowledge, and sleep pattern                                         |                                                                |
| Rhie et al.                      | Cross sectional/sleep patterns, SP and after                        | 16.6 ± 5.7                                                    |
|                                  | school activities                                                   |                                                                |
| Stavinoha et al.                 | Cross sectional/SDB                                                 | 15.0                                                          |
| Ishman et al.                    | Control case/sleep, SDB and quality of life                        | 14.2 ± 7.0                                                    |
|                                  | Intervention/hygiene and sleep quality,                             |                                                                |
| Tan et al.                       | SDB, anthropometric measures and                                    | Basal: 16.5 ± 6.0/After 20 weeks: 11.3 ± 6.0                  |
|                                  | physical activity                                                   |                                                                |
| Esposito et al.                  | Case control/OSAS and executive and                                 | Children with OSAS: 12.4 ± 2.7/Healthy children: 11.9 ± 2.3   |
|                                  | intellectual functions                                              |                                                                |
| Esposito et al.                  | Control case/migraine without aura and                              | Healthy children with migraine without aura: 24.7± 3.2/       |
|                                  | sleep habits                                                       | healthy children: 11.9 ± 4.8                                   |
| Huang et al.                     | Intervention/sleep, quality of life, psychiatric                   | Experimental Group: 25.7 ± 4.6/Control group: 22.2 ± 4.0      |
|                                  | evaluations and sleep disorders                                      |                                                                |
| Langberg et al.                  | Cross sectional/ADHD, IQ, school aspects                            | 15.7 ± 6.3                                                    |
| Perez‑Lloret et al.             | Cross sectional/sleep duration, attention                           | 13.8 ± 0.2                                                    |
|                                  | levels and DE                                                      |                                                                |
| Vlahandonis et al.               | Longitudinal/SDB                                                   | Control: 8.8 ± 1.1/Unresolved: 16.0 ± 1.1/Resolved: 13.2 ± 1.3 |
| Huamaní et al.                   | Cross sectional/life habits                                         | 13.0 ± 5.5                                                    |
| Inocente et al.                  | Cross sectional/hyperactivity, fatigue,                             | With depression: 22/Without depression: 15                    |
|                                  | depression, insomnia, school problems                                |                                                                |
| Jarrin et al.                    | Cross sectional/socioeconomic status, sleep                         | Not shown                                                     |
|                                  | duration, quality and disorders                                     |                                                                |
| Langberg et al.                  | Longitudinal/ADHD, SP, overall functional                           | 18.0 ± 4.3                                                    |
|                                  | deficit and ineffective school adaptation                           |                                                                |
| Polos et al.                     | Cross sectional/age, sex and use of STRICT                          | 16.0 ± 6.1                                                    |
| Gu et al.                        | Cross sectional/craniofacial characteristics                        | 12.2 ± 4.5                                                    |

*PDSS: Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale; β: Coefficient beta; ADHD: attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; IQ: Intelligence quotient; OSAS: obstructive sleep apnea syndrome; N‑C: Narcolepsy with cataplexy; STRICT: Sleep time‑related information and communication technology; SP: school performance; SDB: sleep‑disordered breathing. |First author|Results|
|---|---|
|Maganti et al.|Children with epilepsy reported worse scores for daytime sleepiness when compared to control groups.|
|Bruni et al.|Sleep‑disordered breathing symptoms and parasomnias were independent predictors of excessive daytime sleepiness among patients when adjusted for sleep duration.|
|Perez‑Chada et al.|Children with Asperger syndrome had a higher prevalence of sleep‑onset problems and daytime sleepiness.|
|Huang et al.|Reports of snoring or apnea and daytime sleepiness were independent predictors of academic performance.|
|Huang et al.|Baclofen dose had an effect on nocturnal sleep, with no negative side effects. Both drugs increased sleep time and delta waves during sleep, but only sodium oxybate had an effect on daytime sleepiness and cataplexy in three months.|
|Hudson et al.|Anxious children reported going to bed later and having less sleep during the week. In addition, children with anxiety disorder had different sleep patterns than non‑anxious ones.|
|Moseley et al.|The program increased knowledge of sleep. However, it revealed no significant effects on sleep variables compared to the usual classroom classes.|
|Schneider et al.|Daytime sleepiness increased after the transition from DST up to the third week. Older students and students with higher morning scores reported greater daytime sleepiness after the transition suggesting that these students suffer more from the change.|
|Spencer et al.|After drug treatment, subjects showed a reduction in PDSS score after 6 weeks (‑4.8 points) and after 9 weeks (‑3.1 points).|
|Yang et al.|Subjects with narcolepsy presented a higher PDSS average compared to subjects with obstructive sleep apnea and control group.|
|Cain et al.|37.9% of the sample reported difficulty in starting sleep, 59.2% reported insufficient sleep and 74.8% reported time in bed over the weekend above 2 hours.|
|Rhie et al.|PDSS scores increased with age and were positively correlated with poor school performance and low emotional control.|
|Stavinoha et al.|In those with a low probability of presenting sleep disorders, the prevalence of daytime sleepiness ranged from 13%‑29%. Overall, 23‑35% of the subjects were characterized as sleepy.|
|Ishman et al.|Patients with allergies had higher daytime sleepiness scores compared to patients without allergies.|
|Tan et al.|The intervention had a fundamental effect on the decrease of PDSS scores after 20 weeks of study.|
|Esposito et al.|No PDSS score differences were reported between groups. There were differences in nocturnal respiratory parameters and in executive function scores.|
|Esposito et al.|Children with migraines without aura presented higher scores on PDSS when compared to children with typical development.|
|Huang et al.|The experimental group presented higher PDSS scores when compared to the other groups. Excessive daytime sleepiness was not identified as a risk factor for schizophrenia in adolescents. There was no relationship between sleepiness and BMI in any of the groups investigated.|
|Langberg et al.|Daytime sleepiness was negatively associated with school aspects and IQ, in addition to being associated with aspects of ADHD, but not with school performance.|
|Perez‑Lloret et al.|The low duration of sleep influenced attention through the increase of daytime sleepiness, which reflected in worse school performances.|
|Vlahandonis et al.|Both resolved and unresolved groups had high scores compared to the control group, but there was no difference between the two groups.|
|Huamaní et al.|Smoking was associated with excessive sleepiness. Poor sleep quality and sleep latency > 60 min were associated with a greater likelihood of sleepiness.|
|Inocente et al.|The characteristics of sleep at night and the pattern of multiple sleep latencies showed no difference in patients with or without depression.|
|Jarrin et al.|Socioeconomic status was related to excessive daytime sleepiness in children.|
|Langberg et al.|The relationship between sleepiness and grades is stronger for students with low grades.|
|Polos et al.|The associations of STRICT with daytime sleepiness and sleep duration decreased with age and was stronger in girls.|
|Gu et al.|Craniofacial characteristics are positively associated with daytime sleepiness: tonsil hypertrophy, relatively large tongue, bilateral molar ratio Class II and greater prominence.|

*PDSS: Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale; ADHD: Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder; STRICT: Sleep time‑related information and communication technology; IQ: Intelligence Quotient. Systematic review of PDSS in adolescents

evaluation for children and adolescents, the PDSS. The questionnaire has 8 four-point Likert scale items with a total score varying from 0-32. Of the studies analyzed, 6 showed a prevalence of negative sleep patterns such as excessive daytime sleepiness, with results close to 32 points (20.9 ± 3.5-25.7 ± 4.6 points). The rest of the studies presented mean values of 6.7 ± 0.6-18.0 ± 4.3 points. Because it is a quantitative scale with a defined value and because it does not contain a cut-off point as a predictor of excessive daytime sleepiness, it is inferred that the score near the upper limit of the scale reflects evidence of excessive daytime sleepiness.

Pereira et al. reported that low sleep duration is one of the main predictors of excessive daytime sleepiness when they observed that Brazilian adolescents needed to sleep at least 8.3 hours on school days as a protection against excessive daytime sleepiness. Similarly, one of the analyzed studies – conducted by Huang, Wang and Guilleminault with 1,939 adolescents 12-18 years of age from northern Taiwan, describing sleep problems – found that the mean duration of sleep (7.3 ± 1.2 hours) presented a negative correlation with the PDSS total score in the age groups of 14-15 years and 16-18 years. In addition, other studies on the prevalence of daytime sleepiness identified the presence of this symptom in 25% of university students aged 17-24 years, 35.7% of adolescents up to 21 years and 40% of adolescents aged 12-19 years. However, it is worth mentioning that, in the studies analyzed in the present review, the majority had as an object of study, the use of PDSS in children and adolescents with some associated disease. As for example, a study by Stavinoha et al. in patients with Cornelia de Lange syndrome pointed out the presence of this symptom in 23% of individuals under 15 years of age and in 36% of those above that age.

Regarding research design, most articles were cross sectional studies (n = 14). A few had intervention (n = 5), control (n = 4) or longitudinal (n = 3) designs. In addition, only 2 studies applied follow-up analyzes to their individuals. The systematic analysis and behavior monitoring of daytime sleepiness over time is considered of paramount importance to establish cause and effect relationships. The scarcity of studies with a longitudinal design in the present analysis reveals certain fragility in their conclusions.

In addition to PDSS, other instruments also propose to evaluate excessive daytime sleepiness. In the articles that contribute to this review, authors used the Sleep Disturbance Scale for Children to evaluate sleep habits and disorders, and the Epworth Sleepiness Scale to verify daytime sleepiness in everyday situations in adults and children.

A relevant point is the relation between sleepy young people and school performance. This relationship was verified in a study by Perez-Chada et al. that showed a significant association between daytime sleepiness and school failure. In addition, other studies have also identified this association.

We observed a special concern of researchers in carrying out analyzes to identify key factors that can cause excessive daytime sleepiness in children and adolescents with or without disorders. The studies that used PDSS as an evaluation instrument investigated relationships of daytime sleepiness with various disorders and associated factors, such as school performance and life habits. Thus, this review opens the field for a deeper evaluation of the association between physical activity practice and sedentary behaviors with excessive daytime sleepiness in children and adolescents.

CONCLUSION
We observed that PDSS is a widely used instrument for assessing daytime sleepiness and that, through its questions, it is possible to identify factors related to excessive daytime sleepiness in children and adolescents. Scale scores ranged from 6.7 ± 0.6-25.7 ± 4.6. The main factors associated with daytime sleepiness in the investigated literature were the short sleep duration, occurrence of sleep disorders and, therefore, poor school performance. Despite limitations in the literature, such as the scarcity of studies involving Brazilian children and adolescents, and the lack of proposals for possible cut-off points to discriminate excessive daytime sleepiness, PDSS has proved to be feasible for research with children and adolescents because of its easy application and good understanding among adolescents. 3.   Roehrs T, Carskadon M, Dement W, Roth T. Daytime sleepiness and alertness. In: Kriger MH, Roth T, Dement WC, editors. Principles and practice of sleep medicine. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders. 2005. p. 39‑50.
4.   Pereira E, Teixeira CS, Louzada FM. Sonolência diurna excessiva em adolescentes: prevalência e fatores associados. Rev paul pediatr. 2010;28:98‑103.
5.   Carskadon MA. Patterns of sleep and sleepiness in adolescents. Pediatrician. 1990;17:5‑12.
6.   Mume CO, Olawale KO, Osundina AF. Excessive daytime sleepiness, nocturnal sleep duration and psychopathology among Nigerian university students. South Afr J Psychiatry. 2011;17:108‑11.
7.   Pereira EF, Bernardo MP, D’Almeida V, Louzada FM. Sleep, work, and study: sleep duration in working and non‑working students. Cad Saude Publica. 2011;27:975‑84.
8.   Bittencourt LR, Silva RS, Santos RF, Pires ML, Mello MT. Excessive daytime sleepiness. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2005;27:16‑21.
9.   Carskadon MA, Dement WC, Mitler MM, Roth T, Westbrook PR, Keenan S. Guidelines for the Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT) ‑ a standard measure of sleepiness. Sleep. 1986;9:519‑24.
10.  Johns MW. A new method for measuring daytime sleepiness ‑ the epworth sleepiness scale. Sleep. 1991;14:540‑5.
11.  Carskadon MA, Dement WC. The multiple sleep latency test ‑ what does it measure? Sleep. 1982;5 Suppl 2:S67‑72.
12.  Carskadon MA, Dement WC. Daytime sleepiness ‑ quantification of a behavioral state. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 1987;11:307‑17.
13.  Melendres CS, Lutz JM, Rubin ED, Marcus CL. Daytime sleepiness and hyperactivity in children with suspected sleep‑disordered breathing. Pediatrics. 2004;114: 768‑75.
14.  Drake C, Nickel C, Burduvali E, Roth T, Jefferson C, Pietro B. The pediatric daytime sleepiness scale (PDSS): Sleep habits and school outcomes in middle‑school children. Sleep. 2003;15;26:455‑8.
15.  Felden EP, Carniel JD, Andrade RD, Pelegrini A, Anacleto TS, Louzada FM. Tradução e validação da Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale (PDSS) para o português do Brasil. J Pediatr (Rio J). 2016;92:168‑73.
16.  Downs SH, Black N. The feasibility of creating a checklist for the assessment of the methodological quality both of randomised and non‑randomised studies of health care interventions. J Epidemiol Community Health. 1998;52:377‑84.
17.  Costa AB, Zoltowski AP, Koller SH, Teixeira MA. Construção de uma escala para avaliar a qualidade metodológica de revisões sistemáticas. Cienc Saude Coletiva. 2015;20:2441‑52.
18.  Maganti R, Hausman N, Koehn M, Sandok E, Glurich I, Mukesh BN. Excessive daytime sleepiness and sleep complaints among children with epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav. 2006;8:272‑7.
19.  Bruni O, Ferri R, Vittori E, Novelli L, Vignati M, Porfirio MC, et al. Sleep architecture and NREM alterations in children and adolescents with Asperger syndrome. Sleep. 2007;30:1577‑85.
20.  Perez‑Chada D, Perez‑Lloret S, Videla AJ, Cardinali D, Bergna MA, Fernandez‑Acquier M, et al. Sleep disordered breathing and daytime sleepiness are associated with poor academic performance in teenagers. A study using the pediatric daytime sleepiness scale (PDSS). Sleep. 2007;30:1698‑703.
21.  Huang YS, Wang CH, Guilleminault C. An epidemiologic study of sleep problems among adolescents in North Taiwan. Sleep Med. 2010;11:1035‑42.
22.  Hudson JL, Gradisar M, Gamble A, Schniering CA, Rebelo I. The sleep patterns and problems of clinically anxious children. Behav Res Ther. 2009;47:339‑44.
23.  Moseley L, Gradisar M. Evaluation of a School‑Based Intervention for Adolescent Sleep Problems. Sleep. 2009;32:334‑41.
24.  Schneider AM, Randler C. Daytime sleepiness during transition into daylight saving time in adolescents: Are owls higher at risk? Sleep Med. 2009;10:1047‑50.
25.  Spencer TJ, Greenbaum M, Ginsberg LD, Murphy WR. Safety and Effectiveness of Coadministration of Guanfacine Extended Release and Psychostimulants in Children and Adolescents with Attention‑Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol. 2009;19:501‑10.
26.  Yang CM, Huang YS, Song YC. Clinical utility of the Chinese version of the Pediatric Daytime Sleepiness Scale in children with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome and narcolepsy. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2010;64:134‑40.
27.  Cain N, Gradisar M, Moseley L. A motivational school‑based intervention for adolescent sleep problems. Sleep Med. 2011;12:246‑51.
28.  Rhie S, Chae KY, Lee S. Sleep patterns and school performance of Korean adolescents assessed using a Korean version of the pediatric daytime sleepiness scale. Korean J Pediatr. 2011;54:29‑35.
29.  Stavinoha RC, Kline AD, Levy HP, Kimball A, Mettel TL, Ishman SL. Characterization of sleep disturbance in Cornelia de Lange Syndrome. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2011;75:215‑8.
30.  Ishman SL, Smith DF, Benke JR, Nguyen MT, Lin SY. The prevalence of sleepiness and the risk of sleep‑disordered breathing in children with positive allergy test. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol. 2012;2:139‑43.
31.  Tan E, Healey D, Gray AR, Galland BC. Sleep hygiene intervention for youth aged 10 to 18 years with problematic sleep: a before‑after pilot study. BMC Pediatr. 2012;12:189.
32.  Esposito M, Antinolfi L, Gallai B, Parisi L, Roccella M, Marotta R, et al. Executive dysfunction in children affected by obstructive sleep apnea syndrome: an observational study. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2013;9:1087‑94.
33.  Esposito M, Roccella M, Parisi L, Gallai B, Carotenuto M. Hypersomnia in children affected by migraine without aura: a questionnaire‑based case‑control study. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2013;9:289‑94.
34.  Huang YS, Guilleminault C, Chen CH, Lai PC, Hwang FM. Narcolepsy‑cataplexy and schizophrenia in adolescents. Sleep Med. 2014;15:15‑22.
35.  Langberg JM, Dvorsky MR, Marshall S, Evans SW. Clinical implications of daytime sleepiness for the academic performance of middle school‑aged adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. J Sleep Res. 2013;22:542‑8. Systematic review of PDSS in adolescents

| Reference | Title |
|-----------|-------|
| 36 | A Multi‑Step pathway Connecting Short Sleep Duration to Daytime Somnolence, Reduced Attention, and poor Academic performance: An Exploratory Cross‑Sectional Study in Teenagers. J Clin Sleep Med. 2013;9:466‑73. |
| 37 | A four year follow‑up of sleep and respiratory measures in elementary school‑aged children with sleep disordered breathing. Sleep Med. 2013;14:440‑8. |
| 38 | Sleepiness and sleep characteristics in students from an urban district of Lima, Peru. Arch Argent Pediatr. 2014;112:239‑41. |
| 39 | Depressive feelings in children with narcolepsy. Sleep Med. 2014;15:309‑14. |
| 40 | Objective and Subjective Socioeconomic Gradients Exist for Sleep in Children and Adolescents. Health Psychol. 2014;33:301‑5. |
| 41 | The impact of daytime sleepiness on the school performance of college students with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): a prospective longitudinal study. J Sleep Res. 2014;23:318‑25. |
| 42 | The impact of Sleep Time‑Related Information and Communication Technology (STRICT) on sleep patterns and daytime functioning in American adolescents. J Adolesc. 2015;44:232‑44. |
| 43 | Craniofacial characteristics related to daytime sleepiness screened by the paediatric daytime sleepiness scale. Open Dent J. 2015;9:31‑40. |
| 44 | A multi‑step pathway connecting short sleep duration to daytime somnolence, reduced attention, and poor academic performance: an exploratory cross‑sectional study in teenagers. J Clin Sleep Med. 2013;9:469‑73. |
| 45 | Sonolência Excessiva Diurna: aspectos clínicos, diagnósticos e terapêuticos. Rev Bras Neurol. 2012;48:17‑24. |
| 46 | Clinical diagnosis and misdiagnosis of sleep disorders. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2007;78:1293‑7. |
| 47 | Sleep and sleepiness among working and non‑working high school evening students. Chronobiol Int. 2007;24:99‑113. |
| 48 | Consequences of shiftworking on sleep duration, sleepiness, and sleep attacks. Chronobiol Int. 2010;27:575‑89. |
| 49 | Sleep disorders medicine: basic science, technical considerations, and clinical aspects.3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Health Sciences; 2009. |
| 50 | Neurologia Clínica de Harrison. 3rd ed. Porto Alegre: AMGH; 2015. |
| 51 | Sleep and adolescence: how many hours sleep teenagers need? J Bras Psiqui. 2015;64:40‑4. |
| 52 | Sleep Patterns and Predictors of Disturbed Sleep in a Large Population of College Students. J Adolesc Health. 2010;46:124‑32. |
| 53 | Sleep‑wake patterns and sleep disturbance among Hong Kong Chinese adolescents. Sleep. 2008;31:185‑94. |
| 54 | The sleep disturbance scale for children (SDSC) construction and validation of an instrument to evaluate sleep disturbances in childhood and adolescence. J Sleep Res. 1996;5:251‑61. | 