# Child Health Update

# Sleep-related melatonin use in healthy children

# Abstract

Question A mother brought her 12-year-old son into my office because she is concerned that he has difficulty falling asleep almost every night. Her job involves shift work and she uses melatonin herself to help her fall asleep. She asked if her son could take melatonin. What are the recommendations and considerations for using melatonin in otherwise healthy children and adolescents?

Answer Insomnia is reported in up to a quarter of healthy children and in three-quarters of children with neurodevelopmental and psychiatric conditions, resulting in negative consequences. For children with delayed sleep phase syndrome, melatonin can be a useful treatment together with insomnia evaluation and regular follow-up. For children with otherwise undiagnosed insomnia and healthy sleep hygiene, melatonin use should be considered. While melatonin seems to be safe, there is a lack of evidence for its routine use among healthy children.

This article is eligible for Mainpro-M1 credits. To earn credits, go to www.cfp.ca and click on the Mainpro link.

La traduction en français de cet article se trouve à www.cfp.ca dans la table des matières du numéro d’avril 2016 à la page e179.

Up to 25% of healthy children and adolescents, as well as up to 75% of children with neurodevelopmental or psychiatric conditions, experience difficulty with sleep. Studies continue to demonstrate both short-term and long-term negative consequences of poor sleep in children, including poor concentration, hyperactivity, irritability, poor memory, anxiety, depression, driving safety issues, learning difficulties, and poorer school and daytime performance.

# Insomnia in children

Considerable variability exists in children’s sleep duration. A 16-year longitudinal study from Zurich, Switzerland, which followed parental-reported sleep duration of nearly 500 children, provided the basis for standardized percentile curves of sleep duration, serving as a guide for parental expectations.

Pediatric insomnia is defined as repeated difficulty with sleep initiation, duration, consolidation, or quality that occurs despite age-appropriate time and opportunity for sleep, leading to daytime functional impairment for the child and family. Several conditions can lead to pediatric insomnia with 2 of the most common being delayed sleep phase syndrome (DSPS) and behavioural insomnia of childhood.

In an infant with normal growth and development, an organic cause of insomnia is unlikely, and behavioural or feeding-related issues should be assessed. In some infants, gastroesophageal reflux might be the cause of interrupted or delayed sleep.

In toddlers, sleep disturbances are most commonly associated with fears, and behavioural interventions such as graduated extinction, parental education, and appropriate bedtime routines have been demonstrated to be effective.

In adolescents, DSPS is the most common cause of insomnia. The child will fall asleep later than expected and have difficulty waking up the next morning as the internal circadian pacemaker is not synchronized with the child’s environmental time. Improved sleep hygiene with the addition of melatonin can be useful.

# Melatonin

Sleep hygiene is key to resolving behaviour-related causes of insomnia. Box 1 presents sleep hygiene recommendations for children. Melatonin is becoming

# Box 1. Recommendations for good sleep hygiene for children

- Napping during the day should be avoided
- Appropriate dinnertime should be at least 2 hours before bedtime
- Screen time (ie, watching television, playing computer or video games) should be discontinued at least an hour before bedtime
- Regular bedtime routine including routine sleep and wake-up times should be maintained
- Children should sleep in their own beds
- Sleep environment should be dark and quiet; room should not be too hot
- Caffeine, nicotine, and alcohol should be avoided

Data from Mindell et al and Owens and Moturi. Child Health Update

a popular choice for management among parents and infants, 2.5 to 3 mg in older children, and 5 mg in adolescents. The range in children with special needs varies from 0.5 to 10 mg. Melatonin should be given 30 to 60 minutes before bedtime.

Melatonin is a hormone naturally synthesized by the pineal gland, and its secretion is regulated by the suprachiasmatic nucleus in the hypothalamus. Starting at 3 months of age, high levels of melatonin are secreted at night and low levels are secreted during the day. The circadian pattern of melatonin secretion is the essential mechanism of the sleep-wake cycle. Melatonin has a chronobiotic effect, or circadian phase-shifting effect, and a less established hypnotic and sleep-promoting effect. With a half-life of 40 minutes, and extensive first-pass metabolism, melatonin will reach its peak concentration within 1 hour of administration. Health Canada considers melatonin a natural health product, and it is available in many unique products in Canada. Neither Health Canada nor the US Food and Drug Administration approve melatonin for sleep disorders in children and adolescents, thus its use in children is considered “off-label.”

Effectiveness

There are conflicting reports in the literature on the effectiveness of melatonin for sleep, and this is attributed to subject diversity and differences in dosage, timing, and study designs. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial with 40 children aged 6 to 12, Smits and colleagues confirmed sleep onset with an actigraph. Children received placebo or 5 mg of fast-release melatonin at 6PM for a period of 4 weeks after establishing a 1-week baseline. The treatment group fell asleep earlier (9:09 PM and 10:06 PM for the melatonin group and placebo group, respectively; P = .005) with increased total sleep (9 hours and 43 minutes and 9 hours and 14 minutes for the melatonin group and placebo group, respectively; P = .026). Although 11 of these children were taking methylphenidate for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, covariance analysis found melatonin to be just as effective.

Because of its immunomodulating properties, melatonin is contraindicated in those with immune and lymphoproliferative disorders, as well as in those taking immunosuppressants. Some experts and a few small studies present conflicting findings suggesting that melatonin either lowers or increases seizure thresholds. Very limited data show that it suppresses the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, as endogenous levels of melatonin were found to be elevated in 7 male patients with gonadotropin-releasing hormone deficiency.

Following failure of behaviour modifications, as well as ruling out any other medical causes of insomnia, trying pharmacologic treatment with melatonin seems appropriate. No clear dosing guidelines exist, with effective doses varying across studies. The Canadian Paediatric Society recommends 1 mg of melatonin in children. Child Health Update

9. Rivkees SA. Developing circadian rhythmicity in infants. Pediatrics 2003;112(2):373-81
10. Health Canada [website]. Chemical substance—melatonin. Ottawa, ON: Health Canada; 2015. Available from: http://webprod.hc-sc.gc.ca/nhpid-bdipsn/ingredReq.do?id=1773&lang=eng. Accessed 2015 Dec 13
11. Smits MG, Nagtegaal EE, van der Heijden J, Coenen AM, Kerkhof GA. Melatonin for chronic sleep onset insomnia in children: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. J Child Neurol 2001;16(2):86-92
12. Pelayo R, Yuen K. Pediatric sleep pharmacology. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am 2012;21(4):861-83
13. Luboshitzky R, Lavi S, Thuma I, Lavie P. Increased nocturnal melatonin secretion in male patients with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and delayed puberty. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1995;80(7):2144-8
14. Andersen IM, Kaczmarska J, McGrew SG, Malow BA. Melatonin for insomnia in children with autism spectrum disorders. J Child Neurol 2008;23(5):482-5
15. Hoebert M, van der Heijden KB, van Geijlswijk IM, Smits MG. Long-term follow-up of melatonin treatment in children with ADHD and chronic sleep onset insomnia. J Pineal Res 2009;47(1):1-7

Child Health Update is produced by the Pediatric Research in Emergency Therapeutics (PRETx) program at the BC Children’s Hospital in Vancouver, BC. Dr Janjua is a member and Dr Goldman is Director of the PRETx program. The mission of the PRETx program is to promote child health through evidence-based research in therapeutics in pediatric emergency medicine.
Do you have questions about the effects of drugs, chemicals, radiation, or infections in children? We invite you to submit them to the PRETx program by fax at 604 875-2414; they will be addressed in future Child Health Updates. Published Child Health Updates are available on the Canadian Family Physician website.

Vol 62: april • aVril 2016 | Canadian Family Physician • Le Médecin de famille canadien 317 