Sleep Medicine Reviews 68 (2023) 101742

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Digital media use and sleep in late adolescence and young adulthood: A systematic review

**Article history:**
Received 1 April 2022
Received in revised form 8 December 2022
Accepted 22 December 2022
Available online 31 December 2022

**Keywords:**
Youth
Young adult
Digital media
Social media
Screen time
Sleep
Sleep duration
Sleep quality
Sleep problems
Systematic review

Despite much attention on digital media use and young peoples’ sleep, the literature on digital media and its impact on sleep in older adolescents and young adults remains to be synthesized. We conducted a systematic review of studies including young people aged 16-25 years. We searched Medline, Web of Science, and CINAHL for observational studies, identifying 60 studies. These studies were assessed for methodological quality. Only studies rated as moderate or high-quality studies were included (n = 42). A narrative synthesis summarized the impact of digital media use on eight sleep outcomes: Bedtime; Sleep onset latency or problems falling asleep; Sleep duration; Early awakening; Sleep disturbance; Daytime tiredness and function; Sleep deficits; Sleep quality. In summary, digital media use was associated to shorter sleep duration and poorer sleep quality. These associations were found for general screen use and use of mobile phone, computer, internet, and social media, but not for television, game console, and tablet use. Most studies investigating bedtime or nighttime use found associations to poor sleep outcomes. Later bedtime and daytime tiredness were associated with mobile phone use at night. Additional research is warranted to draw solid conclusions about the causal direction and to understand the underlying mechanisms.

1. Introduction

Sleep is essential to development, mental and physical health, especially in young people to whom adequate sleep is crucial for health, learning and well-being. Inadequate sleep and poor sleep quality are associated with several adverse outcomes both in the short and long term, including poor diet, obesity, increased morbidity, mental health problems such as depression and suicidal behavior, and substance abuse. In the United States, the recommendation on nighttime sleep is 8-10 h of sleep for adolescents and 7-9 h of sleep for young adults. Nonetheless, reports from many countries show that adolescents sleep less than these recommendations and sleep duration has declined over the last decades, although existing data is limited among young adults. A systematic review on data from the Netherlands, United Kingdom and United States reported that one in four slept less than the age-specific recommendation with more pronounced short sleep prevalence for young people; for example, more than half of teenagers aged 14-17 years old did not get the recommended 8 h of sleep. Another study among 8th to 12th graders in the United States reported that more than 40% did not get at least 7 h of sleep per night. Moreover, insomnia symptoms were prevalent with 16.5% of 14-17-year-olds and 22.6% of 18-25-year-olds experiencing difficulties initiating sleep. A meta-analysis of international data among 11-18-year-olds from 1999 to 2010 reported that sleep duration tended to decrease with increasing age and bedtimes tended to become delayed with increasing age.

The advent of internet enable portable small screen devices (e.g., smartphones) provided the world with instant access to the internet and has arguably had a dramatic impact on young people's excessive use of digital media and possible their sleep. recent survey on 1125 people in Denmark shows that more than six out of ten 16-24-year-olds state that entertainment from mobile phones, tablets, computers, video games, or television are the reason to late bedtime and consequently insufficient sleep to feel rested. Among young people, smartphones, and other devices with access to the internet and social media are more prevalent than the more conventional digital media such as television. Nationally representative data from 8th, 10th and 12th grade in the United States reported that time spent online, gaming, and on social media sites has steadily increased from 2010 to 2016 whereas spending time with media such as television has decreased. Still, 12th graders were spending 1.9 h/day on watching television during weekdays. Although time spent on a digital media such as television is decreasing, it is still used and, for example, young adults may have a television screen in the bedroom, and background television can negatively affect sleep through blue light.

Digital media has become an integral part of young peoples’ life and it should be a point of attention that newer, interactive media may affect young people in different ways than the more conventional, one-way communicational digital media. Compared with older adults, young adults are more inclined to like trying new digital media and is the group in Denmark spending the most time on digital media. A recent nationally representative study in Denmark showed that 15-24-year-olds use the internet on their mobile phone on average 316 min per week.

Despite much attention on digital media's impact on sleep, no study has so far systematically reviewed the literature on the entire body of electronic devices and media, both the conventional ones and the modern forms, and their associations with sleep in adolescents and young adults. Existing systematic reviews have mainly focused on school-aged children and young adolescents and have found an association between digital media usage and sleep outcomes: inadequate sleep quantity, poor sleep quality, excessive daytime sleepiness, and insomnia symptoms. Another systematic review explored the relationship between mobile phone use and mental health targeting all age groups and found that mobile phone use at bedtime was associated with shorter sleep duration and lower sleep quality. Few systematic reviews have targeted older adolescents and young adults, but only for specific uses of media, for example, social media or problematic smartphone usage. Both of these reviews found an association with sleep. To our knowledge, no previous review has examined the evidence of the associations between any digital media and any sleep or circadian outcome among adolescents and young adults in the age of 16-25 years. We are interested in any type of digital media device and engagement to fully examine how use digital media impact on sleep, especially today where many new forms of digital media are emerging. It is assumed but untested whether the same sleep deficits reported in children who use digital technologies are also evident in young people. Accordingly, the aim of this study was to fill this gap in the literature by means of a rapid review.

## 2.1. Search strategy

A search strategy was developed based on the PECO (Population, Exposure, Comparison (if any) and Outcome) model. The population was people aged 16-25 years, the exposure was digital media, and the outcome was any sleep outcomes. Literature was searched using the electronic databases Medline, Web of Science, and CINAHL on April 22, 2020. We used subject headings and Medical subject headings (MeSH) terms as well as free text searches in title, abstract, and keywords. The search was limited to articles published in the period January 1, 2010 to April 31, 2021, and only studies written in English, Danish, Swedish, or Norwegian were included in the search. The search strategy included relevant synonyms for the search terms adolescent/young adult (e.g., teenager, college student), digital media (e.g., smartphone, social media), and sleep (e.g., sleep latency, sleep hygiene). Search terms were identified in collaboration with a research librarian with expertise in systematic reviews to ensure the quality of the search strategy. See Table S1 in the supplemental appendix for the full search in each database. In addition, reference lists from previous systematic reviews were reviewed to identify other relevant studies.

## 2.2. Inclusion and exclusion criteria

Inclusion criteria were as follows:

1) Observational studies examining the association between digital media and sleep.
2) Studies with sample participants aged 16-25 years. Studies where the population overlapped with this age range were included if more than 50% of the study population or the average age were within 16-25 years. If age was not described, school level was used as an indicator of age.
3) Measure of digital media. We included studies that examined any digital media device (computer, smartphone, tablet, television, computers, etc.) or reported on a digital media platform (social media, internet, gaming, blogging, e-mail, etc.). That is, time spent on any type of device or any type of digital media platform.
4) Measure of outcomes. Studies that examined outcomes related to going to sleep (e.g., delayed bedtime), during sleep (e.g., sleep disturbance), or indicators of sleep deprivation (e.g., daytime tiredness).
5) Western countries, i.e., all EU countries as well as Andorra, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Monaco, Norway, San Marino, Switzerland, Vatican City, Canada, U.S, Australia, and New Zealand.
6) Peer-reviewed literature published in English, Danish, Swedish, or Norwegian. Studies were excluded if they focused only on specific study populations, for example, young adults with psychiatric diagnoses, overweight, or sleep disorders; were conference literature, books, or opinion papers; or only were available as abstracts.

## 2.3. Screening

This systematic review was based on recommendations from the Cochrane rapid reviews method group and The Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) guidelines for systematic reviews. This review was registered with the international Prospective register of systematic reviews (PROSPERO; CRD42021247592) on April 23, 2021.

A random sample of titles and abstracts (n = 30) were screened by three reviewers to test compliance, and 20% of titles and abstracts were screened for eligibility by two reviewers independently. One reviewer screened the rest of the identified titles/abstracts, while another reviewed the excluded titles/abstracts, and if necessary, disagreement regarding inclusion was resolved through discussion (Cohen's Kappa for agreement: 0.55). Abstracts relevant to the research questions were put forward for full-text. review against the inclusion and exclusion criteria. A random sample of full-text articles (n ¼ 7) were assessed by three reviewers to test compliance. One reviewer assessed the rest of the full-text articles for potentially eligible articles, while another reviewed the excluded full-text articles. Discordance regarding inclusion was resolved through discussion. components, and low quality if it was rated weak on at least two of the three components. Low-quality studies were excluded to ensure moderate and high evidence.

## 2.5. Data extraction and synthesis

We extracted data using a standardized data extraction form that included country of study, sample size, study design, data collection method, sleep outcomes, digital media exposure, and reported findings related to associations between digital media use and sleep. Narrative synthesis was done grouped by sleep outcomes in which we highlighted any similarities or differences in the findings and explored whether heterogeneity in results might be due to variability in study design, populations, measures employed, and outcomes studied.

## 3. Results

### 3.1. Study identification and study characteristics

A total of 13,311 articles were identified through our initial search, and 42 studies were included (see Fig. 1). Eight studies were longitudinal, and 35 were cross-sectional studies. The paper by Billari et al. was included as both a cross-sectional and longitudinal study. The most common country where the studies were conducted were in the U.S. (n ¼ 13). Sleep duration (n ¼ 23) and sleep quality (n ¼ 28) were most measured. The measurement of digital media use differentiated substantially with mobile phone use (n ¼ 18) and total screen use (n ¼ 14) were most commonly measured. We compiled variables measuring the general use of digital media into “total screen use”. The total screen use variables cut across the specific digital devices and online activities (e.g., some studies summarized total time spent on all types of screens). Study characteristics are described in Table 1. Table 1
Study characteristics.

| Country                          | n (%)  |
|----------------------------------|--------|
| USA                              | 13 (31)|
| Belgium                          | 4 (10) |
| Canada                           | 4 (10) |
| Sweden                           | 3 (7)  |
| Norway                           | 2 (5)  |
| New Zealand                      | 2 (5)  |
| Australia                        | 2 (5)  |
| Schweiz                          | 2 (5)  |
| Denmark                          | 2 (5)  |
| UK                               | 2 (5)  |
| Croatian                         | 1 (2)  |
| Holland                          | 1 (2)  |
| Germany                          | 1 (2)  |
| Spain                            | 1 (2)  |
| Scotland                         | 1 (2)  |
| Across different countries       | 1 (2)  |
| Study design a                  |        |
| Cross sectional                  | 35 (83)|
| Longitudinal                     | 8 (19) |
| Sample size                      |        |
| <100                             | 4 (9)  |
| 100e499                          | 10 (24)|
| 500e999                          | 10 (24)|
| 1000e4999                        | 9 (21) |
| 5000e10000                       | 2 (5)  |
| >10000                           | 7 (17) |
| Sample source                    |        |
| High school                      | 4 (9)  |
| College/University               | 13 (31)|
| Other                            | 25 (60)|
| Digital media b                 |        |
| Mobile phone/smartphone          | 18 (43)|
| Computer/laptop                  | 9 (21) |
| Tablet                           | 3 (7)  |
| Television                       | 10 (24)|
| Game console                     | 3 (7)  |
| Internet                         | 5 (12) |
| Social media                     | 11 (26)|
| Screen use                       | 14 (33)|
| Sleep outcome c                  |        |
| Delayed bedtime                  | 5 (12) |
| Sleep onset and problems falling asleep | 5 (12) |
| Sleep disturbance                | 3 (7)  |
| Sleep duration                   | 23 (55)|
| Early awakening                  | 3 (7)  |
| Daytime tiredness and function   | 8 (19) |
| Sleep quality                    | 28 (67)|

a The column does not sum up to 100% because one of the studies consists of both a longitudinal study and a cross-sectional study.
b The column does not sum up to 100% because some of the studies examines different types of digital media within the same study.
c The column does not sum up to 100% because some of the studies examines different sleep outcomes within the same study.

was associated with later bedtimes among 15-17-year-olds. Another study found that the association between use of internet and mobile phone after 6 p.m. and bedtimes depended on the country in which it was investigated. Using mobile phone and internet contributed to delayed bedtimes in Australian, but delayed bedtimes was only associated with mobile phone use in the Netherlands, and internet use in Canada. A third study found an association for gaming duration (hours per weekday) and gaming engagement, but not for gaming accessibility (number of devices owned), and later bedtimes. Gaming engagement was assessed using the Game engagement questionnaire (GEQ). The participants were asked nine questions measuring the flow dimension of game engagement, for example, ‘If someone talks to me, I don't hear’, ‘I feel like I can't stop playing’.

### Sleep onset latency and problems falling asleep

Five studies investigated the relationship between digital media use and sleep onset latency or problems falling asleep and found inconsistent evidence for the association. Four of the studies investigated sleep onset latency, defined as the time it takes a person to fall asleep after bedtime. Self-reported problems with falling asleep was only investigated in one study, which did not find an association to smartphone use. Hysing et al. found that use of computer, mobile phone, tablet, game console or television in the last hour before bedtime was associated with increased odds of sleep onset latency of more than 60 min. Results further revealed that young people using more than 4 h of total screen time after school was related to a sleep onset latency of more than 60 min (OR: 1.49, 95% CI: 1.36e1.64). On the contrary, Cabre-Riera et al. found no association between either use of laptop, mobile phone, tablet, game console or television and sleep onset latency.

### Sleep disturbances

Three studies investigated the relationship between digital media use and sleep disturbances, including restless sleep, nightmares, and nightly awakenings. Of these two studies linked digital media use to sleep disturbance. One study showed that time spent with a tablet was associated with multiple awakenings at night but found no association for other devices, including laptop, mobile phone, television, and total screen time. Another study investigated associations between text messaging frequency, awareness of mobile phone notifications at nighttime, compulsion to check notifications at nighttime, and sleep across a seven-day period and found that awareness of nighttime notifications was the only predictor for sleep disruptions and for women only.

### Short sleep duration

We synthesized the findings of the different sleep outcomes separately. Summary of studies and their findings are described in Table 2. In addition, detailed descriptions of study design and results are available in the supplementary appendix Table S2.

Five studies investigated the relationship between digital media use and bedtimes, and four found an association between digital media use and delayed bedtimes. For example, a study found that sending and/or receiving text messages at night.

A total of 23 studies investigated the relationship between the use of digital media and sleep duration, of which three studies have longitudinal design. Most studies (n = 16) found an association between digital media use and short sleep duration. However, the association depended on the type of digital media investigated. The studies showed evidence for mobile phones, computers (primarily gaming on a computer), the internet, social media, general use of screens, and inconsistent results for tablets, game console, and television. Nine studies investigated digital media use specific at nighttime, and seven of these found association with shorter sleep duration. However, in some studies the association depended on other factors. Table 2
Summary of studies and their findings on the relationship between digital media use and sleep outcomes among 16-25-year-olds.

| Digital media            | Measured at         | Sleep outcomes                                                                                                                        | Study      | Quality     |
|-------------------------|---------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|-------------|
|                         | bedtime/night       | Delayed bedtime      | Sleep onset latency; problems falling asleep | Sleep disturbances | Short sleep duration | Early awakening | Daytime tiredness; poor daytime function | Poor sleep quality |
| Mobile phone/smartphone |                     |                       |                                                                                  |            |             |
| Adams et al.           | Yes                 |                       | þ                                                                                | CS         | Moderate    |
| Amez et al.            | No                  |                       | þ                                                                                | CS         | High        |
| Bartel et al.          | Yes                 | þ/                    | þ/                                                                               | CS         | Moderate    |
| Billari et al.         | Yes                 |                       | e                                                                                | CS & LD    | High        |
| Cabre-Riera et al.     | No                  | e                     | e                                                                                | CS         | Moderate    |
| Dissing et al.         | No                  |                       | þ//x                                                                              | LD         | Moderate    |
| Fossum et al.          | Yes                 |                       | e                                                                                | þ          | CS         | High        |
| Galland et al.         | Yes                 |                       | e                                                                                | CS         | High        |
| Garmy et al.           | Yes                 | þ                     | þ                                                                                | þ          | CS         | Moderate    |
| Hysing et al.          | Yes                 |                       | þ                                                                                | CS         | Moderate    |
| Johansson et al.       | Yes                 |                       | þ                                                                                | þ          | CS         | Moderate    |
| Li et al.              | Yes                 |                       | þ                                                                                | CS         | Moderate    |
| Murdock et al.         | Yes                 |                       | þ/                                                                               | þ/         | þ/          | CS         | Moderate    |
| Rod et al.             | Yes                 | e                     | e                                                                                | þ          | e           | CS         | Moderate    |
| Rosen et al.           | Yes                 |                       | þ/x                                                                              | CS         | Moderate    |
| Sohn et al.            | No                  |                       | þ                                                                                | CS         | Moderate    |
| Tashjian et al.        | No                  |                       | þ                                                                                | CS         | Moderate    |
| Thomee et al.          | No                  |                       | þ/                                                                               | LD         | Moderate    |
| Tablet                  |                     |                       |                                                                                  |            |             |
| Cabre-Riera et al.     | No                  | e                     | þ                                                                                | e          | CS         | Moderate    |
| Fossum et al.          | Yes                 |                       | e                                                                                | e          | CS         | High        |
| Hysing et al.          | Yes                 | þ                     |                                                                                  | CS         | Moderate    |
| Computer/laptop        |                     |                       |                                                                                  |            |             |
| Billari et al.         | Yes                 |                       | þ/                                                                               | CS & LD    | High        |
| Cabre-Riera et al.     | No                  | e                     | e                                                                                | e          | CS         | Moderate    |
| Fossum et al.          | Yes                 |                       | e                                                                                | þ/         | CS         | High        |
| Galland et al.         | Yes                 |                       | þ                                                                                | þ          | CS         | High        |
| Hysing et al.          | Yes                 | þ                     |                                                                                  | CS         | Moderate    |
| Lemola et al.          | Yes                 |                       | þ/                                                                               | þ/         | e           | CS         | Moderate    |
| Kakinami et al.        | No                  |                       | e                                                                                | þ          | CS         | High        |
| Smith et al.           | No                  | þ/                    |                                                                                  | CS         | High        |
| Thomee et al.          | No                  |                       | þ/                                                                               | LD         | Moderate    |
| Television              |                     |                       |                                                                                  |            |             |
| Billari et al.         | Yes                 |                       | þ/                                                                               | CS & LD    | High        |
| Cabre-Riera et al.     | Yes                 | e                     | e                                                                                | e          | CS         | Moderate    |
| Fossum et al.          | Yes                 |                       | e                                                                                | e          | CS         | High        | Table 2 (continued)

| Digital media            | Measured at         | Sleep outcomes                                                                                                            | Study      | Quality  |
|-------------------------|---------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|----------|
|                         | bedtime/night       | Delayed bedtime      | Sleep onset latency;     | Sleep          | Short sleep  | Early      | Daytime tiredness; poor        | Poor sleep  |
|                         |                     |                     | problems falling asleep  | disturbances   | duration     | awakening  | daytime function               | quality     |
| Galland et al.         | Yes                 |                     | þ                       |                 | þ            | CS         | High     |
| Hysing et al.          | Yes                 |                     | þ                       |                 |              | CS         | Moderate |
| Johansson et al.       | Yes                 |                     |                         |                 | þ            | CS         | Moderate |
| Kakinami et al.        | No                  |                     | e                       |                 | þ            | CS         | High     |
| Kenney et al.          | No                  |                     | -/x                     |                 |              | CS         | High     |
| Lund et al.            | No                  |                     |                         | e               |              | CS         | Moderate |
| Tavernier et al.       | No                  |                     | e                       |                 | e            | LD         | High     |
| Game console            |                     |                     |                         |                 |              |            |          |
| Cabre-Riera et al.     | No                  | e                   | e                       | e               |              | e          | CS         | Moderate |
| Fossum et al.          | Yes                 |                     |                         | e               | e            | CS         | High     |
| Hysing et al.          | Yes                 |                     | þ                       |                 |              | CS         | Moderate |
| Internet                |                     |                     |                         |                 |              |            |          |
| Bartel et al.          | Yes                 | þ/                  | þ/                     |                 |              | CS         | Moderate |
| Belanger et al.        | No                  |                     | þ/                     |                 |              | CS         | Moderate |
| Billari et al.         | No                  |                     | þ                       |                 | þ            | CS &       | High     |
|                         |                     |                     |                         | LD              |              |            |          |
| Johansson et al.       | Yes                 |                     | þ                       |                 |              | CS         | Moderate |
| Galland et al.         | Yes                 |                     | þ                       |                 | þ            | CS         | High     |
| Social media            |                     |                     |                         |                 |              |            |          |
| Das-Friebel et al.     | Yes                 |                     | þ//x                   | e               |              | LD         | Moderate |
| Dissing et al.         | No                  |                     |                         | -/x            |              | LD         | Moderate |
| Galland et al.         | Yes                 |                     | þ                       |                 | þ            | CS         | High     |
| Hysing et al.          | No                  | þ                   | þ                       |                 |              | CS         | Moderate |
| Johansson et al.       | Yes                 |                     | þ                       |                 | þ            | CS         | Moderate |
| Levenson et al.        | Yes                 |                     |                         |                 | þ            | CS         | Moderate |
| Levenson et al.        | No                  |                     |                         |                 | þ            | CS         | Moderate |
| Tavernier et al.       | No                  |                     | e                       |                 | e            | LD         | High     |
| Thomee et al.          | No                  |                     |                         |                 | þ            | LD         | Moderate |
| van der Velden         | No                  |                     |                         |                 | e            | LD         | Moderate |
| et al.                 | (2019)              |                     |                         |                 |              |            |          |
| Xanidis et al.         | No                  |                     |                         |                 | þ            | CS         | Moderate |
|                         |                     |                     |                         |                 |              |            |          |
| Screen use             |                     |                     |                         |                 |              |            |          |
| Baiden et al.          | No                  |                     | þ                       |                 |              | CS         | High     |
| Cabre-Riera et al.     | Yes                 | e                   | e                       | e               |              | e          | CS         | Moderate |
| Exelmans et al.        | No                  |                     |                         | þ               |              | þ          | CS         | Moderate |
| Exelmans et al.        | Yes                 | þ/                  |                         |                 |              | CS         | Moderate |
| Exelmans et al.        | No                  | þ                   | e                       |                 |              | CS         | Moderate |
| Galland et al.         | Yes                 | þ                   | þ                       |                 | þ            | CS         | High     |
| Hysing et al.          | Yes                 | þ                   | þ                       |                 |              | CS         | Moderate |
| Jones et al.          | (2019)              | Yes                 | e                   | þ/                  | e               | CS         | Moderate | Table 2 (continued)

| Digital media        | Measured at      | Sleep outcomes                                                                                                         | Study    | Quality  |
|----------------------|------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|----------|
|                      | bedtime/night     |                                                                                                                      |          |          |
|                      |                  | Delayed     Sleep onset latency;        Sleep         Short sleep   Early       Daytime tiredness; poorPoor sleep |          |          |
|                      |                  | bedtime     problems falling asleep     disturbances  duration      awakening   daytime function           quality |          |          |
| Kenney et al.        | No               | þ/                                                                                                                  | CS       | High     |
| (2017)               |                  |                                                                                                                      |          |          |
| Leech et al. (2017)  | No               | x                                                                                                                    | CS       | Moderate  |
| McManus et al.       | No               | -/x                        -/x                                                                                       | LD       | High     |
| (2020)               |                  |                                                                                                                      |          |          |
| Stefan et al. (2019) | No               | x/þ                                                                                                                  | CS       | High     |
| Walsh et al. (2020)  | Yes              | þ                                                                                                                    | CS       | High     |
| Xu et al. (2019)     | No               | e                                                    þ                                                                 | CS       | High     |

Note. (CS) Cross-sectional design; (LD) Longitudinal design; (þ) More digital media use has an association with delayed bedtime, sleep latency onset, problems falling asleep, sleep disturbances, short sleep duration, early awakening, daytime tiredness, poor daytime function or poor sleep quality; (x) Association is the opposite (e.g., more digital media use has an association with better sleep); () No association; A combination of (þ, -, x) means that the directions of the associations differ across subgroups or measures.

including country of origin and the presence of depressive symptoms. Four studies showed an association between digital media use and longer sleep duration. One study showed that social media use at bedtime was associated with shorter sleep duration among undergraduate students with high levels of depressive symptoms, but for students with low levels of depressive symptoms, results showed that bedtime social media use was associated with longer sleep duration.

### Early awakening

Two cross-sectional studies found an association between digital media use and early awakening or a discrepancy between wake-up times. In one study adolescents who sent or received text messages on their mobile phone at night on a weekly basis had more discrepancy between wake-up time during the school week and weekends. In another study, number of devices used, and television and mobile phone use were associated with the response “woke too early.” However, one cross-sectional study found no association between digital media use and premature awakenings.

### Daytime tiredness and poor daytime function

Six cross-sectional studies investigated the relationship between digital media use (especially mobile phone/smartphone use at night) and daytime tiredness, and all except for one study found association between digital media use and daytime tiredness. Use of mobile phone or smartphone at night were linked to being more tired or sleepy during the day. For example, one study found association between being awakened by mobile phone notifications in the middle of the night and more daytime sleepiness among students, but for men only. Two studies examined digital media use and daytime function and found inconsistent results on whether digital media exacerbates or improves functional difficulties during the day.

### Poor sleep quality

A total of 28 studies investigated the association between digital media use and sleep quality, of which 19 was cross-sectional and eight were longitudinal. The studies in this section used instruments of sleep quality or sleep problems that covered the above sleep outcomes (e.g., sleep duration, daytime tiredness, and sleep onset). For example, the Pittsburgh sleep quality index and the Insomnia severity index. Studies that examined sleep quality based on one global measure of sleep satisfaction was also included. Most studies (n = 20) found that digital media use was associated with poor sleep quality. Overall, the studies indicated that screen time and use of mobile phone/smartphone, computer, internet, and social media worsened sleep quality.

Use of mobile phone/smartphone was examined in 12 studies. For example, one study found that a one standard deviation increase in students' frequency of smartphone use for different activities (such as “reading e-mails” and “taking pictures”) is associated with 10.3% lower odds of experiencing very good sleep quality. Another study found an association between a high level of call and text interactions (>30 per day) for women. However, 4-month follow-up analysis revealed no association. Four studies used a measure of smartphone addiction and found an association between smartphone addiction and poor sleep quality. Six studies measured smartphone/mobile phone use at bedtime or during nighttime and four studies found an association to poor sleep quality. In contrast, one study, which examined the use of smartphone/mobile phone to texting 1 h before bedtime (>3 nights per week), found no association between use of smartphone/mobile phone at bedtime and poor sleep quality. A second study also found no association between smartphone use during nighttime and poor sleep quality.

Three studies indicated that use of smartphones and social media may have an association with less sleep problems. For example, a longitudinal study with a four-month follow-up period reported that a big network size of smartphone interactions (call and text contacts and Facebook friends) was associated with less sleep problems, but for men only. Most studies (4 of 6) found no association between television and sleep quality. Furthermore, there was no association between playing on a game console or using a tablet and poorer sleep quality. However, these results were only based on two studies. A total of 10 studies examined digital media use specific at bedtime or nighttime and eight found association between some types of digital media and poor sleep quality. ## 3.10. Summary of results

Overall, there is general support that the timing of digital media use is important for young people's sleep. Using digital media at bedtime/nighttime is associated with delayed bedtime, short sleep duration, sleep quality and daytime tiredness. A second result is that particularly the use of smartphones revealed as having a potential negative impact on sleep. Particularly, the use of the smartphone before going to bed and notifications from the smartphone during night were identified as related to delayed bedtime, short sleep duration, sleep quality and daytime tiredness. Other digital media devices also showed associations with sleep outcome (e.g., computer), but no associations were found for television. A third aspect of findings is the engagement with digital media content. The identified studies suggested that gaming, internet use and social media use are associated with shorter sleep duration, and poor sleep quality. Moreover, the findings revealed that especially addiction to and problematic use of social media or smartphone are related to poor sleep quality while high level of gaming engagement is associated with delayed bedtime. In contrast, a study examining 1-h evening exposure to light from devices found no differences in sleep onset latency and sleepiness. Another explanation for the negative influence of digital media use on sleep is the interplay between blue-light screen exposure and the content watched on the screen. Another hypothesis is the sleep displacement hypothesis where digital media is used as an activity to fall asleep, which may adversely impact sleep by delaying bedtime and sleep onset. The mechanisms behind the relationship between digital media use and sleep are not well empirically established, but central mechanism in explaining changes in bedtime, circadian rhythm and sleep must be found in the two-process model, which is fundamental for sleep regulation. Two main processes should be in sync for normal sleep and awake regulation and functioning: the circadian and the homeostatic (sleep-wake) process. Evening light exposure and prolonged bedtime will inevitably affect sleep process and sleep duration and subsequent daytime function. Shorter sleep time is further associated with more sleep problems including insomnia.

## 4. Discussion

This review investigated the evidence on the association between digital media use and a range of sleep outcomes in late adolescence and young adulthood. Digital media use was linked to delayed bedtimes, daytime tiredness, and early awakening, but the strongest evidence was found for shorter sleep duration and poor sleep quality. Despite it is difficult to conclude definitely, because there are inconsistencies in how digital media and sleep were measured, there are still some noteworthy findings.

### 4.1. Timing of digital media use

One strong finding was that the majority of studies investigating digital media use at bedtime or nighttime found associations to poor sleep outcomes, making this an important time period. Two main and not mutually exclusive hypotheses to explain how digital media use at bedtime/nighttime affects sleep are hyperarousal and blue light explanations. The first hypothesis is that the engagement with digital media may induce mental arousal or hyperarousal, leading to difficulties falling asleep and poor sleep quality. Our findings cautiously suggest that more communicative digital media (such as smartphones and social media), have a greater impact on sleep than more passive media (such as television), and one could imagine that more communicative digital media entails a greater arousal than passive media. However, this theory can be difficult to deduce because different digital media devices and platforms are often used for the same activities. For example, nowadays, many young people watch films and tv-series on their computer instead of on a television. Therefore, the lack of association between television viewing and sleep outcomes may be due to a declining consumption of television among young people. The digital media content and type of communication may influence sleep depending on the degree to which they are arousing. In contrast to texting and sending a message through social media platforms, talking on the phone may provide more immediate, contingent feedback, which may positively influence the emotional state and the sleep initiation and continuity. For example, a prospective three-day study with adolescents (mean age 14.5 years) found that adolescents sleep fewer hours when they use more time than usual on texting and computer work, whereas talking on a mobile phone was associated with a longer sleep duration. The results from this study may also be due to the fact that texting and computer work involves looking intensively at a screen while talking on a mobile phone would typically not involve looking at a screen.

### 4.2. Type of digital media device

With respect to type of device, this review found support for a negative association between mobile phone use and sleep. Some studies found negative impacts on sleep from notification or other disturbances from the digital media during night time. For example, Rod et al. demonstrated that those with frequently smartphone interrupted sleep on average reported sleeping almost 1 h less than those with uninterrupted sleep. The authors concluded that smartphone interrupted sleep was not associated with sleep quality. Still, other studies found that nighttime mobile phone use and awakenings or notifications from the mobile phone were negatively associated with sleep quality. It is possible that addition or problematic use of smartphone/mobile phone explain the effect of disturbances during nighttime on subjective sleep quality. For instance, it was shown that people who are more anxious about and dependent on digital media have more nighttime phone awakenings which was associated with more sleep problems. Additionally, it is possible that this negative sleep effect results from small size devices. Small-sized devices such as smartphones are held closer to the face with risk of blue light exposure, interact with the user and are easier to use in constant interaction routine (including sleeping with the mobile phone in bed), which may impair the circadian rhythm. Also, these devices are usually placed near the user where vibrations for notifications could interrupt sleep. sleep. The nighttime use of smartphones and social media may be particularly likely to influence sleep, as young people who are exchanging messages right before bed may find it difficult to disengage from these conversations for sleep, or content in social media can be psychologically stimulating inducing hyperarousal reactions.

Three studies included in the current review examined gender differences in the association between smartphone use and sleep quality. There was some consistency across studies that call and text interactions, nighttime notifications or availability demands (the perceptions that you have be reachable via the mobile phone at any time) are associated with immediate disturbed sleep among women (cross-sectional analyses). In contrast, a study that examined smartphone interactions found that more Facebook friends and call/text interactions were associated with better sleep for men at 4-month follow-up. Thus, smartphone use may have a positive impact on sleep among men, although the authors argued that these results may reflect a person's sociability. The negative impact of digital media use may be reflected to a greater extent by the content, timing, and amount of digital media use rather than the network size. This is supported by a longitudinal study showing that number of friends on Facebook is associated with better mental health, but use of Facebook features is related to poorer mental health. Same mechanism may be applicable for the relationship between digital media use and sleep. Moreover, potential gender differences may reflect gender-specific digital media use. This was, however, not a part of the current review, but Murdoch et al. reported that women have more daily text messaging and more nighttime notifications from the smartphone compared to men.

### Strengths and limitations

Our systematic review had several strengths. This study is the first to try gather the literature on any type of digital media and sleep parameters among 16-25-year-olds. Furthermore, we made a comprehensive systematic review that complied with guidelines from the Cochrane Rapid Reviews method group, and we used a validated assessment tool to qualify studies, and only included those with the best quality. Current review also had limitations. Only papers written in English, Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish as well as samples from Western countries were included, thereby limiting the generalizability of findings. Likewise, some of the included studies were done on a sample of college students or self-referred, which also limited the generalizability of the findings. In some of the studies an age range was not explicitly provided, which made it difficult to ensure that the results from these studies were consisted with late adolescent and young adults. Another limitation is the heterogeneity of included studies, which precluded a meta-analysis.

Our review highlights several gaps in the current evidence base on the association between digital media use and sleep. First, many studies (about half of the included studies) used a global measure when assessing digital media use, thus not exploring the timing of screen use (e.g., daytime or nighttime specific usage). For example, Murdock et al. assessed the average number of daily texts by asking the participants to count the number of text messages they had sent and received during the previous 24-h period. Despite many studies in the current review included nighttime digital media use, the lack of daytime specific use precludes from examining whether digital media use in the daytime can affect sleep. Second, most studies used a cross-sectional design, making it difficult to draw conclusion about causal directions and our results may be due to reversed causality. Studies examining strategies for improving sleep by reducing digital media use at night can support our findings and provide some indirect evidence of causation and that reducing media use has a positive effect on sleep. However, few studies focus on young adults, but interventions in adolescents have shown positive effects on sleep. For example, a targeted strategy of mobile phone restriction in the hour before bed among adolescents resulted in “lights out” 17 min earlier and a total sleep time increase of 19 min per night. Still, more longitudinal studies, interventional or experimental studies manipulation the use of digital media are required to better disentangle the relationships observed from the included studies. Third, most of the studies used self-reported measurements of digital media use and sleep outcomes, and therefore had a risk of misclassification, recall and social desirability bias. Future studies should to a greater extent use objective measurement for sleep, e.g., sleep diaries, actigraphy, and applications to smartphones. Moreover, there is a need for validated measures of digital media use to determine when and how digital media is used. Fourth, there is a need for future studies to examine gender differences.

### Conclusion

Associations were consistently demonstrated for digital media use and delayed bedtimes, daytime tiredness, early awakening, sleep deficits, sleep duration as well as sleep quality in late adolescents and young adults. There were inconsistent results for sleep onset latency, problems falling asleep, sleep disturbances and daytime function. The strongest evidence was seen for digital media use, including general screen use, use of mobile phones, computers (including gaming), internet and social media, and shorter sleep duration as well as poor sleep quality. Awareness of these findings may have practice implications to public health due to the increasing use of digital media worldwide and high prevalence of short sleep and poor sleep quality among young people. The age range of 16-25 years is characterized by increasingly autonomy regarding how to use own time and a period where social media use may become more intense. Therefore, young people themselves should become aware of how use of digital media may impact sleep negatively. Both families, schools, public health campaigns and clinical practice could be relevant to assist young people in developing good sleep habits.

### Practice points

1. The findings in current review contribute to increasing awareness on the possible negative impact of digital media use on sleep in late adolescence and young adulthood.
2. Current evidence demonstrates that particularly bedtime and nighttime use of digital media may result in later bedtime, shorter sleep time, poorer sleep quality and daytime tiredness.
3. More awareness on screen use and activating processes before sleep is needed. ## Research agenda

Future research could benefit from.

1. More rigorous experimental or longitudinal designs. It is warranted to clarify the causal relationship between digital media use and sleep, and investigation of both light and content suppressing the sleep wake and circadian process.
2. More research utilizing objective measures of sleep outcomes and validated measures of digital media use.
3. Measures of a broad range of digital media activities and how content may cause activation or deactivation.
4. Explore when digital media are used to determine the impact of using digital media at different times throughout day and night.
5. Investigate gender difference and other possible moderators in the relationship.

## Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare not to have any conflict of interest.

## Acknowledgements

The research was partly supported by The Danish Health Authority. The Danish Health Authority was not involved in designing the study, collecting, analyzing, or interpreting data, in writing manuscript, or in the decision to submit the manuscript for publication.

## Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smrv.2022.101742. flow states, self-perceived risk-taking, device accessibility, parental regulation of media and bedtime. Sleep Med 2017;30:64e70.

| Study | Findings |
|-------|----------|
| Exelmans L, Van den Bulck J. | Self-control depletion and sleep duration: the mediating role of television viewing. Psychol Health 2018;33(10):1251e68. |
| Jones MJ, Dawson B, Gucciardi DF, Eastwood PR, Miller J, Halson SL, et al. | Evening electronic device use and sleep patterns in athletes. J Sports Sci 2019;37(8):864e70. |
| Rod NH, Dissing AS, Clark A, Gerds TA, Lund R. | Overnight smartphone use: a new public health challenge? A novel study design based on high-resolution smartphone data. PLoS One 2018;13(10):12. |
| Cabre-Riera A, Torrent M, Donaire-Gonzalez D, Vrijheid M, Cardis E, Guxens M. | Telecommunication devices use, screen time and sleep in adolescents. Environ Res 2019;171:341e7. |
| Hysing M, Pallesen S, Stormark KM, Jakobsen R, Lundervold AJ, Sivertsen B. | Sleep and use of electronic devices in adolescence: results from a large population-based study. BMJ Open 2015;5(1):7. |
| Exelmans L, Van den Bulck J. | Bedtime, shuteye time and electronic media: sleep displacement is a two-step process. J Sleep Res 2017;26(3):364e70. |
| Murdock KK, Horissian M, Crichlow-Ball C. | Emerging adults' text message use and sleep characteristics: a multimethod, naturalistic study. Behav Sleep Med 2017;15(3):228e41. |
| Johansson AEE, Petrisko MA, Chasens ER. | Adolescent sleep and the impact of technology use before sleep on daytime function. J Pediatr Nurs 2016;31(5):498e504. |
| Galland BC, de Wilde T, Taylor RW, Smith C. | Sleep and pre-bedtime activities in New Zealand adolescents: differences by ethnicity. Sleep Health 2020;6(1):23e31. |
| Galland BC, Gray AR, Penno J, Smith C, Lobb C, Taylor RW. | Gender differences in sleep hygiene practices and sleep quality in New Zealand adolescents aged 15 to 17 years. Sleep Health 2017;3(2):77e83. |
| Das-Friebel A, Lenneis A, Realo A, Sanborn A, Tang NKY, Wolke D, et al. | Bedtime social media use, sleep, and affective wellbeing in young adults: an experience sampling study. JCPP (J Child Psychol Psychiatry) 2020;61(10):1138e49. |
| Amez S, Vujic S, Soffers P, Baert S. | Yawning while scrolling? Examining gender differences in the association between smartphone use and sleep quality. J Sleep Res 2020;29(6):13. |
| Baiden P, Tadeo SK, Peters KE. | The association between excessive screen-time behaviors and insufficient sleep among adolescents: findings from the 2017 youth risk behavior surveillance system. Psychiatr Res 2019;281:8. |
| Xu F, Adams SK, Cohen SA, Earp JE, Greaney ML. | Relationship between physical activity, screen time, and sleep quantity and quality in US adolescents aged 16-19. Int J Environ Res Publ Health 2019;16(9):30. |
| Leech JA. | Changes in sleep duration and recreational screen time among Canadians, 1998-2010. J Sleep Res 2017;26(2):202e9. |
| Belanger RE, Akre C, Berchtold A, Michaud PA. | A U-shaped association between intensity of internet use and adolescent health. Pediatrics 2011;127(2):E330e5. |
| Kakinami L, O'Loughlin EK, Brunet J, Dugas EN, Constantin E, Sabiston CM, et al. | Associations between physical activity and sedentary behavior with sleep quality and quantity in young adults. Sleep Health 2017;3(1):56e61. |
| Kenney EL, Gortmaker SL. | United States adolescents' television, computer, videogame, smartphone, and tablet use: associations with sugary drinks, sleep, physical activity, and obesity. J Pediatr 2017;182:144e9. |
| Stefan L, Horvatin M, Baic M. | Are sedentary behaviors associated with sleep duration? A cross-sectional case from Croatia. Int J Environ Res Publ Health 2019;16(2):8. |
| Tashjian SM, Mullins JL, Galvan A. | Bedtime autonomy and cellphone use influence sleep duration in adolescents. J Adolesc Health 2019;64(1):124e30. |
| Lemola S, Brand S, Vogler N, Perkinson-Gloor N, Allemand M, Grob A. | Habitual computer game playing at night is related to depressive symptoms. Pers Indiv Differ 2011;51(2):117e22. |
| Tavernier R, Willoughby T. | Sleep problems: predictor or outcome of media use among emerging adults at university? J Sleep Res 2014;23(4):389e96. |
| Fossum IN, Nordnes LT, Storemark SS, Bjorvatn B, Pallesen S. | The association between use of electronic media in bed before going to sleep and insomnia symptoms, daytime sleepiness, morningness, and chronotype. Behav Sleep Med 2014;12(5):343e57. |
| Exelmans L, Van den Bulck J. | Binge viewing, sleep, and the role of pre-sleep arousal. J Clin Sleep Med 2017;13(8):1001e8. |
| Xanidis N, Brignell CM. | The association between the use of social network sites, sleep quality and cognitive function during the day. Comput Hum Behav 2016;55:121e6. |
| McManus B, Underhill A, Mrug S, Anthony T, Stavrinos D. | Gender moderates the relationship between media use and sleep quality. J Sleep Res 2020;30(4):e13243. |
| Rosen L, Carrier LM, Miller A, Rokkum J, Ruiz A. | Sleeping with technology: cognitive, affective, and technology usage predictors of sleep problems among college students. Sleep Health 2016;2(1):49e56. |
| Levenson JC, Shensa A, Sidani JE, Colditz JB, Primack BA. | Social media use before bed and sleep disturbance among young adults in the United States: a nationally representative study. Sleep 2017;40(9):7. |
| Levenson JC, Shensa A, Sidani JE, Colditz JB, Primack BA. | The association between social media use and sleep disturbance among young adults. Prev Med 2016;85:36e41. |
| Walsh NA, Rodriguez N, Repa LM, King E, Garland SN. | Associations between device use before bed, mood disturbance, and insomnia symptoms in young adults. Sleep Health 2020;6(6):822e7. |
| Adams SK, Kisler TS. | Sleep quality as a mediator between technology-related sleep quality, depression, and anxiety. Cyberpsychol, Behav Soc Netw 2013;16(1):25e30. |
| Li J, Lepp A, Barkley JE. | Locus of control and cell phone use: implications for sleep quality, academic performance, and subjective well-being. Comput Hum Behav 2015;52:450e7. |
| Lund HG, Reider BD, Whiting AB, Prichard JR. | Sleep patterns and predictors of disturbed sleep in a large population of college students. J Adolesc Health 2010;46(2):124e32. |
| Thomee S, H€arenstam A, Hagberg M. | Mobile phone use and stress, sleep disturbances, and symptoms of depression among young adults - a prospective cohort study. BMC Publ Health 2011;11(1):1e11. |
| Thomee S, Harenstam A, Hagberg M. | Computer use and stress, sleep disturbances, and symptoms of depression among young adults - a prospective cohort study. BMC Psychiatr 2012;1:176. |
| van der Velden PG, Setti I, van der Meulen E, Das M. | Does social networking sites use predict mental health and sleep problems when prior problems and loneliness are taken into account? A population based prospective study. Comput Hum Behav 2019;93:200e9. |
| Dissing AS, Rod NH, Gerds TA, Lund R. | Smartphone interactions and mental well-being in young adults: a longitudinal study based on objective high-resolution smartphone data. Scand J Publ Health 2021;49(3):325e32. |
| Cain N, Gradisar M. | Electronic media use and sleep in school-aged children and adolescents: a review. Sleep Med 2010;11(8):735e42. |
| Van den Bulck J. | Adolescent use of mobile phones for calling and for sending text messages after lights out: results from a prospective cohort study with a one-year follow-up. Sleep 2007;30(9):1220e3. |
| Tavernier R, Heissel JA, Sladek MR, Grant KE, Adam EK. | Adolescents' technology and face-to-face time use predict objective sleep outcomes. Sleep Health 2017;3(4):276e83. |
| Stockdale LA, Coyne SM. | Bored and online: reasons for using social media, problematic social networking site use, and behavioral outcomes across the transition from adolescence to emerging adulthood. J Adolesc 2020;79:173e83. |
| King DL, Gradisar M, Drummond A, Lovato N, Wessel J, Micic G, et al. | The impact of prolonged violent video-gaming on adolescent sleep: an experimental study. J Sleep Res 2013;22(2):137e43. |
| Weaver E, Gradisar M, Dohnt H, Lovato N, Douglas P. | The effect of pre-sleep video-game playing on adolescent sleep. J Clin Sleep Med 2010;6(2):184e9. |
| Cajochen C, Frey S, Anders D, Spati J, Bues M, Pross A, et al. | Evening exposure to a light-emitting diodes (LED)-backlit computer screen affects circadian physiology and cognitive performance. J Appl Physiol 2011;110(5):1432e8. |
| Gronli J, Byrkjedal IK, Bjorvatn B, Nodtvedt O, Hamre B, Pallesen S. | Reading from an iPad or from a book in bed: the impact on human sleep. A randomized controlled crossover trial. Sleep Med 2016;21:86e92. |
| Chinoy ED, Duffy JF, Czeisler CA. | Unrestricted evening use of light-emitting tablet computers delays self-selected bedtime and disrupts circadian timing and alertness. Phys Rep 2018;6(10):e13692. |
| Figueiro M, Overington D. | Self-luminous devices and melatonin suppression in adolescents. Light Res Technol 2016;48(8):966e75. |
| Bues M, Pross A, Stefani O, Frey S, Anders D, Sp€ati J, et al. | LED-backlit computer screens influence our biological clock and keep us more awake. J Soc Inf Disp 2012;20(5):266e72. |
| Chang A-M, Aeschbach D, Duffy JF, Czeisler CA. | Evening use of light-emitting eReaders negatively affects sleep, circadian timing, and next-morning alertness. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2015;112(4):1232e7. |
| Van der Lely S, Frey S, Garbazza C, Wirz-Justice A, Jenni OG, Steiner R, et al. | Blue blocker glasses as a countermeasure for alerting effects of evening light-emitting diode screen exposure in male teenagers. J Adolesc Health 2015;56(1):113e9. |
| Wood B, Rea MS, Plitnick B, Figueiro MG. | Light level and duration of exposure determine the impact of self-luminous tablets on melatonin suppression. Appl Ergon 2013;44(2):237e40. |
| Burke T, Markwald R, McHill A, Chinoy E, Snider J, Bessman S, et al. | Effects of caffeine on the human circadian clock in vivo and in vitro. Sci Transl Med 2015;7(305). |
| Heath M, Sutherland C, Bartel K, Gradisar M, Williamson P, Lovato N, et al. | Does one hour of bright or short-wavelength filtered tablet screenlight have a meaningful effect on adolescents' pre-bedtime alertness, sleep, and daytime functioning? Chronobiol Int 2014;31(4):496e505. |
| Bowler J, Bourke P. | Facebook use and sleep quality: light interacts with socially induced alertness. Br J Psychol 2019;110(3):519e29. |
| Shakya HB, Christakis NA. | Association of Facebook use with compromised well-being: a longitudinal study. Am J Epidemiol 2017;185(3):203e11. |
| Tan E, Healey D, Gray AR, Galland BC. | Sleep hygiene intervention for youth aged 10 to 18 years with problematic sleep: a before-after pilot study. BMC Pediatr 2012;12:189. |
| De Sousa IC, Araújo JF, De Azevedo CVM. | The effect of a sleep hygiene education program on the sleep-wake cycle of Brazilian adolescent students. Sleep Biol Rhythm 2007;5(4):251e8. |
| Bartel K, Scheeren R, Gradisar M. | Altering adolescents' pre-bedtime phone use to achieve better sleep health. Health Commun 2019;34(4):456e62. | 