# Influence of Light at Night on Melatonin Suppression in Children

## Context
The sensitivity of melatonin to light suppression is expected to be higher in children because children have large pupils and pure crystal lenses. However, melatonin suppression by light in children remains unclear.

## Objective
We investigated whether light-induced melatonin suppression in children is larger than that in adults.

## Methods
Thirty-three healthy primary school children (mean age, 9.2 ± 1.5 y) and 29 healthy adults (mean age, 41.6 ± 4.7 y) participated in two experiments. In the first experiment, salivary melatonin concentrations in 13 children and 13 adults were measured at night under a dim light (30 lux) and a moderately bright light (580 lux) in an experimental facility. Pupil diameters were also measured under dim light and bright light. In the second experiment, melatonin concentrations in 20 children and 16 adults were measured under dim light in the experimental facility and under room light at home (illuminance, 140.0 ± 82.7 lux).

## Results
In experiment 1, the melatonin concentration was significantly decreased by exposure to moderately bright light in both adults and children. Melatonin suppression was significantly larger in children (88.2%; n = 5) than in adults (46.3%; n = 6; P < .01), although the data for some participants were excluded because melatonin concentrations had not yet risen. In experiment 2, melatonin secretion was significantly suppressed by room light at home in children (n = 15; P < .05) but not in adults (n = 11).

## Conclusion
We found that the percentage of melatonin suppression by light in children was almost twice that in adults, suggesting that melatonin is more sensitive to light in children than in adults at night.

Melatonin is secreted from the pineal gland during the night, and the timing of secretion is controlled by the suprachiasmatic nucleus, which is the central circadian pacemaker. Melatonin secretion is suppressed by exposure to light. Suppression of melatonin was first demonstrated by exposure to bright light at 2500 lux in humans. Recent studies have shown that melatonin secretion is suppressed even by several hundred lux of room light. Negative effects of light at night on health via suppression of melatonin secretion have been discussed in many reports.

There are interindividual variations in melatonin suppression by light. These variations may be important when estimating the effects of light at night. For example, the magnitude of melatonin suppression by light is influenced by several factors, such as recent history of exposure to light, ethnicity, and aging. However, little attention has been given to the effect of light on melatonin suppression in children. Pupil size decreases with aging, and light transmission rate of the crystal lens also decreases with aging. The decrease in transmission rate with aging is particularly prominent in a short wavelength of light, which has a strong impact on light-induced melatonin suppression and pupillary light response. These age-dependent characteristics of the eye may influence light-induced melatonin suppression. It has been reported that light-induced melatonin suppression is reduced in elderly people. On the other hand, children have large pupils and pure crystal lenses. These ophthalmological characteristics imply high sensitivity of melatonin to light in children.

In modern society, artificial light at night may have adverse effects not only on human sleep but also on health problems such as cancer and obesity. These effects are possibly mediated by melatonin suppression by light at night. Many studies have shown relationships between sleep problems in children and media use such as watching TV and playing computer games. Recently, the influence of light from these devices on melatonin secretion has been examined in young adults and adolescents. Therefore, basic research to clarify the sensitivity of melatonin to light in children is needed to consider an appropriate light environment for children’s health.

In the present study, we hypothesized that the magnitude of melatonin suppression is larger in children than in adults, and we therefore compared light-induced melatonin suppression in children and adults.

## Subjects and Methods

### Participants
Thirty-three healthy primary school children (mean age, 9.2 ± 1.5 y) and 29 of their healthy parents (mean age, 41.6 ± 4.7 y) volunteered to participate in two experiments in this study. An oral and paper-based explanation was conducted before the experiment for children and their parents (adults). All participants gave written informed consent for participation in the study, which was approved by the Ethical Committee of Kyushu University. Informed consent forms for the children were completed by the parents after confirming their child’s agreement for participation. The habitual bedtimes for children and adults were 9:33 PM ± 45 minutes and 11:22 PM ± 66 minutes, respectively. Mean ± SD of M-E score was 56.8 ± 7.2 in adults (nine morning types, 11 neither types, and one evening type).

### Experimental conditions and procedures in experiment 1
Thirteen healthy children (mean age, 8.6 ± 1.5 y; five males and eight females) and 13 of their parents (mean age, 41.2 ± 4.8 y; three men and 10 women) participated in experiment 1. Beginning 1 week before the start of the experiment, the participants were instructed to maintain their habitual sleep-wake times and keep a sleep diary. A survey using the Japanese version of the Morningness-Eveningness Questionnaire for adults was conducted. The experiment on the first night was conducted at the same place and using the same protocol as experiment 1. The experiment started at 7 PM, and the saliva samples were collected under a dim light condition (30 lux in angle of gaze) until individual habitual bedtime. The next day, the participants returned home, and they were asked to collect saliva samples within 1 week by themselves at home under a room light condition every hour until individual habitual bedtime. Saliva samples were frozen at home and sent to our laboratory.

### Experimental conditions and procedures in experiment 2
The aim of the second experiment was to determine the effects of room light at home on melatonin concentration in children. Twenty healthy children (mean age, 9.7 ± 1.4 y; seven males and 13 females) and 17 of their parents (mean age, 41.9 ± 4.7 y; three men and 14 women) participated in experiment 2. Twelve of the participants (six children and six adults) were the same as those in experiment 1. The experiment on the first night was conducted at the same place and using the same protocol as experiment 1. The illuminance level and color temperature were measured in the dining room. # Melatonin Suppression by Light in Children

|Melatonin (pg/ml)|Adults (n=13)|Children (n=13)|
|---|---|---|
|30|30|30|
|25|25|25|
|20|20|20|
|15|15|15|
|10|10|10|
|5|5|5|
|0|0|0|

Melatonin concentrations under a dim light and under a bright light in experiment 1 are shown in Figure 1. Melatonin secretion in children was completely suppressed by exposure to bright light or had not yet risen by bedtime. There were interindividual differences in the increase in melatonin concentration during the night. Because melatonin concentration did not increase in some children (n 8) and adults (n 7), data for these participants were excluded from further analysis. For the remaining participants, the melatonin concentration under bright light was significantly lower than that under dim light in both adults and children (P .05; Wilcoxon signed-rank test) (Figure 2). The percentage of melatonin suppression at bedtime (0 hours) in children was 88.2%, which was significantly larger than that in adults (46.3%) (t 3.35; P .01). Pupil diameters were significantly decreased by exposure to light in both children and adults. The pupil diameters in children were significantly larger than those in adults under dim light (t 5.20; P .01) and bright light (t 4.18; P .01) (Figure 3). No significant difference was found for constriction rate of pupil size between adults and children (t 0.51; P .61).

Figure 1. Changes in salivary melatonin concentrations in adults (top) and children (bottom) in experiment 1. Melatonin concentration increased during the night under dim light (left) and was reduced by exposure to bright light (right). In children, melatonin secretion was completely suppressed by light or had not yet risen by bedtime (right, bottom).

Effect of room light at home (experiment 2)

Melatonin concentrations under dim light in the experimental room and room light at home in experiment 2 are shown in Figure 4. The data from six adults and five children were not included because their melatonin concentrations had not yet risen during our collection period. For the remaining participants, there was no significant difference in melatonin concentrations under dim light and under room light in adults. On the other hand, melatonin concentration in children at bedtime was significantly lower under room light compared to dim light.

|Hours before bedtime (h)|Adults|Children|
|---|---|---|
|-5|0|0|
|-4|0|0|
|-3|0|0|
|-2|0|0|
|-1|0|0|
|0|0|0|

Figure 2. Average melatonin concentrations and percentages of melatonin suppression (mean SE) in experiment 1. Zero hours means the bedtime of each participant. The data for some participants were excluded because their melatonin concentration did not increase before bedtime. The melatonin concentration under bright light was significantly lower than that under dim light. The percentage of melatonin suppression before bedtime in children (88.2%; n 5) was significantly larger than that in adults (46.3%; n 6). **, P .01; *, P .05. 7
** ** In the present study, pupil size in children was significantly larger than that in adults (Figure 3), which is consistent with the results of previous studies. Large pupil size in children might be a cause of large melatonin suppression. In experiment 1, the average pupil area under bright light in children (49.7 mm2) was 1.5 times that in adults (33.0 mm2). On the other hand, the percentage of melatonin suppression in children (88.2%) was 1.9 times that in adults (46.3%). These findings suggest that more than half of the difference in melatonin suppression in children and adults would be explained by pupil area.

Figure 3. Pupil diameters (mean ± SE) in adults and children in experiment 1. The pupil diameter in children was significantly larger than that in adults under both dim light and bright light. **, P < .01.

Although the high transmission rate of a short wavelength of light in the crystal lens of a child might be another reason for the large melatonin suppression in children, further studies are needed to test this hypothesis. Unfortunately, the percentage of melatonin suppression by light in half of the participants was not calculated because melatonin concentration did not increase before habitual bedtime. This means our data might be limited to subjects with early chronotype. Because some studies have suggested a correlation between delayed sleep phase and higher light sensitivity, we might have underestimated or overestimated the amount of melatonin suppression in the present study. We need to clarify this limitation in further study.

In the present study, melatonin concentration at home under artificial light was measured. We found that melatonin was significantly suppressed in children but not in adults. The percentages of melatonin suppression in children and adults were 51.6 and 26.7%, respectively. Melatonin suppression in children was almost twice that in adults. This was consistent with the results of the experiment 1. We obtained reproducible results and confirmed that melatonin in children is more sensitive than

Dim
Home
25 Adults
Adults
25 Children
Children
* 100
100 +
20 (n=11)
20 (n=15)
15 + 15
10 10
5 5
0 0
-3 -2 -1 0 -3 -2 -1 0
Hours before bedtime (h) Hours before bedtime (h)

Figure 4. Melatonin concentrations (mean ± SE) under dim light in the experimental facility and under room light at home in adults and children in experiment 2. Zero hours means the bedtime of each participant. Melatonin concentration in children was significantly lower under room light at home than under dim light in the experimental facility. The percentage of melatonin suppression in children (51.6%; n = 15) tended to be higher than that in adults (26.7%; n = 11). *, P < .05; , P < .10. that in adults to light at night, even light of several hundred lux like an ordinary room light.

## Conclusions
We found that the percentage of melatonin suppression by light in children was almost twice that in adults, suggesting that melatonin in children is more sensitive than that in adults to light at night.

## Acknowledgments
We thank Ikuo Tanaka and Keiko Kuroki at Kyushu University for supporting this study.

## Table
| Study Aspect | Findings |
|--------------|----------|
| Melatonin Sensitivity | Children are more sensitive to light suppression than adults |
| Ethnicity Influence | Larger melatonin suppression observed in European populations compared to Asian populations |
| Daytime Light Exposure | Less exposure during the day may increase sensitivity to light at night |
| Posture Influence | Posture can influence melatonin concentration, though results are controversial |

In modern society, many studies have shown relationships between sleep problems in children and media use such as watching TV and playing computer games. Recently, the influence of light from these devices on melatonin secretion has been examined in young adults and adolescents. In the present study, we found that melatonin suppression in primary school children was more sensitive to light than that in adults. Furthermore, melatonin concentration in some children had not yet risen by bedtime. One study showed that adolescents living in homes without electric lighting have earlier sleep times. Although there is room for discussion on the relationships of melatonin suppression by light exposure at night with sleep and health in children, more attention should be paid to the lighting environment at night for children. Furthermore, it would be important to know about homeostatic and circadian components in children of this age. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-1629                                                                                                   jcem.endojournals.org      3303

adapted pupil size in normal human subjects. Invest Ophthalmol Vis         physiology and cognitive performance. J Appl Physiol. 2011;110:
Sci. 1994;35:1132–1137.                                                    1432–1438.
14.  Boettner EA, Wolter JR. Transmission of the ocular media. Invest      29.  Wood B, Rea MS, Plitnick B, Figueiro MG. Light level and duration
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1962;1:776 –783.                                       of exposure determine the impact of self-luminous tablets on mel-
15.  Barker FM, Brainard GC, Dayhaw-Barker P. The direct spectral               atonin suppression. Appl Ergon. 2013;44:237–240.
transmittance of the excised human lens as a function of age. Invest  30.  Heath M, Sutherland C, Bartel K, et al. Does one hour of bright or
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1991;32S:1083.                                         short-wavelength filtered tablet screenlight have a meaningful effect
16.  Brainard GC, Hanifin JP, Greeson JM, et al. Action spectrum for            on adolescents’ pre-bedtime alertness, sleep, and daytime function-
melatonin regulation in humans: evidence for a novel circadian pho-        ing?   Chronobiol Int. 2014;31:496 –505.
toreceptor. J Neurosci. 2001;21:6405– 6412.                           31.  Figueiro MG, Wood B, Plitnick B, Rea MS. The impact of watching
17.  Thapan K, Arendt J, Skene DJ. An action spectrum for melatonin             television on evening melatonin levels. J Soc Inf Disp. 2014;21:417–
suppression: evidence for a novel non-rod, non-cone photoreceptor          421.
system in humans. J Physiol. 2001;535:261–267.                        32.  Horne JA, Ostberg O. A self-assessment questionnaire to determine
18.  Gamlin PD, McDougal DH, Pokorny J, Smith VC, Yau KW, Dacey                 morningness-eveningness in human circadian rhythms. Int J Chro-
DM. Human and macaque pupil responses driven by melanopsin-                nobiol. 1976;4:97–110.                                                       Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jcem/article/99/9/3298/2538381 by guest on 24 August 2024
containing retinal ganglion cells. Vision Res. 2007;47:946 –954.      33.  Turner PL, Mainster MA. Circadian photoreception: ageing and the
19.  Lee SI, Hida A, Tsujimura S, Morita T, Mishima K, Higuchi S.               eye’s important role in systemic health. Br J Ophthalmol. 2008;92:
Association between melanopsin gene polymorphism (I394T) and               1439 –1444.
pupillary light reflex is dependent on light wavelength. J Physiol    34.  Aoki H, Ozeki Y, Yamada N. Hypersensitivity of melatonin sup-
Anthropol. 2013;32:16.                                                     pression in response to light in patients with delayed sleep phase
20.  Katsuura T, Ochiai Y, Senoo T, Lee S, Takahashi Y, Shimomura Y.            syndrome. Chronobiol Int. 2001;18:263–271.
Effects of blue pulsed light on human physiological functions and     35.  Higuchi S, Motohashi Y, Maeda T, Ishibashi K. Relationship be-
subjective evaluation.       J Physiol Anthropol. 2012;31:23.              tween individual difference in melatonin suppression by light and
21.  Reiter RJ, Tan DX, Korkmaz A, Ma S. Obesity and metabolic syn-             habitual bedtime. J Physiol Anthropol Appl Human Sci. 2005;24:
drome: association with chronodisruption, sleep deprivation, and           419 – 423.
melatonin suppression. Ann Med. 2012;44:564 –577.                     36.  Smith KA, Schoen MW, Czeisler CA. Adaptation of human pineal
22.  Owens J, Maxim R, McGuinn M, Nobile C, Msall M, Alario A.                  melatonin suppression by recent photic history. J Clin Endocrinol
Television-viewing habits and sleep disturbance in school children.        Metab. 2004;89:3610 –3614.
37.  Deacon S, Arendt J. Posture influences melatonin concentrations in
Pediatrics. 1999;104:e27.                                                  plasma and saliva in humans. Neurosci Lett. 1994;167:191–194.
23.  Harada T, Kadowaki A, Shinomiya H, Takeuchi H. Relationship           38.  Nathan PJ, Jeyaseelan AS, Burrows GD, Norman TR. Modulation
between watching late night TV and morningness-eveningness of              of plasma melatonin concentrations by changes in posture. J Pineal
18 –22-year old Japanese students. Sleep Biol Rhythm. 2004;2:              Res. 1998;24:219 –223.
97–98.                                                                39.  Voultsios A, Kennaway DJ, Dawson D. Salivary melatonin as a
24.  Dworak M, Schierl T, Bruns T, Strüder HK. Impact of singular               circadian phase marker: validation and comparison to plasma mel-
excessive computer game and television exposure on sleep patterns          atonin. J Biol Rhythms. 1997;12:457– 466.
and memory performance of school-aged children. Pediatrics. 2007;     40.  Arendt J. Melatonin: characteristics, concerns, and prospects. J Biol
120:978 –985.                                                              Rhythms. 2005;20:291–303.
25.  Li S, Jin X, Wu S, Jiang F, Yan C, Shen X. The impact of media use    41.  Pullman RE, Roepke SE, Duffy JF. Laboratory validation of an in-
on sleep patterns and sleep disorders among school-aged children in        home method for assessing circadian phase using dim light melato-
China. Sleep. 2007;30:361–367.                                             nin onset (DLMO). Sleep Med. 2012;13:703–706.
26.  Cain N, Gradisar M. Electronic media use and sleep in school-aged     42.  Peixoto CA, da Silva AG, Carskadon MA, Louzada FM. Adoles-
children and adolescents: a review. Sleep Med. 2010;11:735–742.            cents living in homes without electric lighting have earlier sleep
27.  Higuchi S, Motohashi Y, Liu Y, Ahara M, Kaneko Y. Effects of VDT           times. Behav Sleep Med. 2009;7:73– 80.
tasks with a bright display at night on melatonin, core temperature,  43.  Stevens RG. Does electric light stimulate cancer development in
heart rate, and sleepiness. J Appl Physiol. 2003;94:1773–1776.             children? Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2012;21:701–704.
28.  Cajochen C, Frey S, Anders D, et al. Evening exposure to a light-     44.  Waterhouse J, Fukuda Y, Morita T. Daily rhythms of the sleep-wake
emitting diodes (LED)-backlit computer screen affects circadian            cycle. J Physiol Anthropol. 2012;31:5. 