# Associations of circadian factors with insomnia symptoms and emotional and behavioral problems among school-age children

## Study Objectives
To examine the associations of circadian characteristics (ie, chronotype and social jetlag) with insomnia symptoms and emotional and behavioral problems among school-age children.

## Methods
A total of 620 primary school children (median age = 10.06, standard deviation = 1.16, 58.7% boys) were recruited and assessed by a set of parent-report questionnaires, including Children’s Sleep Habit Questionnaire for measuring sleep-wake patterns and insomnia symptoms (bedtime resistance, sleep onset delay, and night waking), Children’s Chronotype Questionnaire for assessing the child’s chronotype preference, and Strength and Difficulties Questionnaire for assessing emotional and behavioral problems. Linear regression models were applied to examine the associations of chronotype and social jetlag with insomnia symptoms and mental health outcomes, in which age, sex, family income, and average sleep duration were entered as covariates.

## Results
Evening chronotype was significantly associated with bedtime resistance and sleep onset delay, while social jetlag was not related to insomnia symptoms. Evening chronotype was also significantly associated with externalizing symptoms after controlling for potential confounders.

## Conclusions
Evening chronotype, but not social jetlag, was the risk factor for insomnia symptoms, and evening chronotype was further associated with increased behavioral problems in school-age children. Our findings underscored the roles of circadian factors in relation to sleep and mental health problems in this young population.

## Keywords
sleep, insomnia, chronotype, social jetlag, mental health, children

## BRIEF SUMMARY
**Current Knowledge/Study Rationale:** There have been few studies that examined the role of circadian factors in sleep quality and mental health among school-age children. To investigate the associations of chronotype and social jetlag with insomnia as well as emotional and behavioral problems in children, we conducted a cross-sectional study in 620 Hong Kong elementary school students. We found that children with evening chronotype characteristics were more likely to present with insomnia and externalizing symptoms.

**Study Impact:** Our results emphasize the importance of considering circadian issues in order to improve sleep and mental well-being in this age group.

## INTRODUCTION
Mental health issues among school-age children are a global concern. The reported prevalence rates of emotional and behavioral problems were around 8% in British, 6% in American, 4% in Japanese, and 12% in Chinese children. Previous research suggested that childhood emotional and behavioral problems might persist into adolescence and young adulthood. There is a sex difference in the presentation of childhood psychopathology, where boys tend to be more vulnerable to externalizing symptoms (eg, behavioral problems), while girls are more likely to develop internalizing symptoms (eg, emotional problems). In addition, the trajectory of emotional and behavioral problems tends to be more persistent in girls.

Sleep problems, particularly insomnia, are not uncommon in children. The prevalence of childhood insomnia ranges from 4% to 40%, associated with mental health problems. A previous study found that conduct and hyperactivity problems were more closely associated with insomnia symptoms (ie, limit setting insomnia) than other sleep problems, such as snoring and parasomnias, among school-age children. A 5-year longitudinal community-based study has shown that the risk of having poor mental health was 4 times higher for children with new onset insomnia than those without insomnia, and 5 times higher for those with persistent insomnia compared to those with insomnia only at baseline.

The causes of insomnia may be related to a constellation of genetic, psychosocial, physiological, and environmental factors. factors. In particular, circadian factors, such as chronotype (ie, circadian preference) and circadian misalignment are often implicated in the etiology of insomnia in adults. Among young children, the mismatch between the parent-selected rest schedule and the child’s intrinsic circadian phase might be the potential cause for sleep onset insomnia. While most of the existing research on circadian factors has focused on the period of adolescence, which is typically associated with an increase in evening tendency along with a series of psychosocial and physiological changes, the epidemiological data suggested that the shift in circadian preference could start as early as childhood (around 8 years old). In school-age children, the sleep-wake pattern is greatly affected by the school schedule. Even a 15-minute delay in school start time has been found to increase sleep duration and improve mood and daytime behaviors. The differences in social demands between weekdays and weekends could lead to a discrepancy in sleep schedule between weekdays and weekends that simulates the effects of jetlag, which is typically known as “social jetlag.” Individuals may have different preferences for rest and activity timing, which is referred to as “chronotype.” Social jetlag may be associated with evening chronotype characteristics, weekday sleep duration, and other environmental and lifestyle factors. Previous studies conducted in adolescents and adults suggested that evening chronotype and social jetlag are both risk factors for mental health problems, such as increased mood symptoms and behavioral problems. Nonetheless, there has been limited research that investigated circadian-related factors in relation to sleep and mental health in school-age children.

Therefore, we conducted a community-based study with the following objectives: (1) to test the association of chronotype and social jetlag with insomnia symptoms, and (2) to explore the effects of chronotype and social jetlag on emotional and behavioral problems while taking insomnia symptoms into account in school-age children.

## METHODS

### Study procedure and participants

The present study was conducted from March to May 2017, in Hong Kong. A total of 1271 students in grades 1–5 (ie, 8–12 years of age) from 3 randomly selected local primary schools and their caregivers were invited. A total of 635 families provided their written consent and 621 families returned the questionnaires (response rate = 49%). The recruitment flow chart is shown in Figure 1.

Among these 3 recruited schools, 2 have similar school start time (1 starts at 8:15 AM and 1 starts at 8:20 AM) and the third school’s start time is 8:00 AM. The primary caregiver of the recruited child filled out a set of questionnaires about the child’s demographic, sleep, and circadian characteristics as well as mental health status. Participants did not receive any incentive for taking part in the study. The study protocol was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee, The University of Hong Kong.

### Measures

Sleep-wake pattern and insomnia symptoms were evaluated by the Children’s Sleep Habits Questionnaire (CSHQ). Caregiver reported their child’s bedtime, rise time, and sleep duration during weekdays and weekends. Weekly sleep duration, weekly bedtime, and weekly rise time were calculated as the weighted average of these sleep parameters on weekdays and weekends (eg, weekly sleep duration = {weekday sleep duration × 5} + {weekend sleep duration × 2}/7). Weekday-to-weekend discrepancy in sleep was calculated by subtracting weekday sleep from weekend sleep. Social jetlag (SJL) was calculated by subtracting weekday midpoint of sleep from weekend midpoint of sleep. Insomnia symptoms were assessed by 3 subscales in the CSHQ: bedtime resistance (6 items; score range: 6–18), sleep onset delay (1 item; score range: 1–3), and night waking (3 items; score range: 3–9). The CSHQ has been validated in the Chinese population, showing good psychometric properties.

Circadian preference was measured by the Children’s Chronotype Questionnaire. The questionnaire was previously validated against actigraphy in children aged 4–11 years old. Children with (1) a morningness/eveningness (ME) score ≥ 33 and (2) chronotype (CT) score > 3 were regarded as having evening chronotype. As a subsample, 13 children were randomly selected and invited to wear actigraphy (Actiwatch Pro, Philips Respironics, USA) for 7 consecutive days in order to cross-check the validity of the Children’s Chronotype Questionnaire.

Emotional and behavioral problems were assessed by the Strength and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ). Emotional and behavioral problems were assessed by the Strength and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ). behavioral problems were reflected by 2 subscale scores (ie, internalizing and externalizing scores). Internalizing score was the sum of emotional and peer-problem subscale scores. Externalizing score was the sum of conduct and hyperactivity subscale scores. The possible scores of these 2 subscales both range from 0 to 20, with higher scores suggesting more severe emotional and behavioral problems. Specifically, children with higher internalizing scores would likely present with mood-related symptoms (eg, low mood, more worries and fears, as well as social withdrawal), while children with higher externalizing scores would be more likely to exhibit behavioral problems (eg, getting into fights, being overactive or easily distracted). The Chinese version of SDQ has been validated in children aged 6–12 years in Hong Kong.

## Statistical analyses
Insomnia symptoms, SDQ scores, and social jetlag were analyzed as continuous variables. Chronotype was analyzed as both continuous (ie, ME score) as well as dichotomous variables (ie, non-evening chronotype [NE-type] and evening chronotype [E-type]). Independent t tests and chi-square tests were performed to compare socio-demographic features and sleep characteristics between the 2 chronotype groups (NE-type vs E-type). The associations of chronotype and SJL with insomnia symptoms were tested by linear regression models, in which each child’s age, sex, recruited school, and weekly sleep duration were entered as covariates. The associations of chronotype and SJL with emotional and behavioral problems (SDQ scores) were also tested by linear regression models. In model 1, the child’s age, sex, recruited school, family income, and weekly sleep duration were adjusted. In model 2 insomnia symptoms were additionally controlled for apart from the potential confounders adjusted in model 1. Covariates were selected on the basis of previous reports of their associations with sleep and mental health in children as well as our preliminary univariate analyses. Bonferroni corrections were applied in the linear regression analyses. When the associations of chronotype and SJL with insomnia symptoms were examined, a statistical significance was at P < .007 with 6 predictors. When the associations of chronotype and SJL with emotional and behavioral symptoms were examined, a statistical significance was at P < .007 with 6 predictors in model 1 and was at P < .005 with 9 predictors in model 2. All the analyses were performed using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) for Windows 22.0.

Chronotype Questionnaire ME score was correlated with midpoint of sleep (r = .61, P = .027) during weekdays and midpoint of sleep during weekends (r = .58, P = .037) as measured by actigraphy. There were 68.7% and 30.0% of the children who were classified as NE-type and E-type, respectively, when both ME and CT scores were considered. Compared to those children described as NE-type, those with evening chronotype had shorter sleep duration (8:25 ± 0:44 vs 8:42 ± 0:43, P < .001) and later bedtime (22:42 ± 0:39 vs 22:06 ± 0:42, P < .001) and rise time (7:32 ± 0:25 vs 7:13 ± 0:26, P < .001) across a week, and were more likely to have sleep problems (87.0% vs 53.5%, P < .001). In addition, children with evening chronotype also had greater weekday-to-weekend discrepancies in sleep duration (1:16 ± 1:16 vs 0:47 ± 1:02, P < .001) and rise time (2:30 ± 1:01 vs 1:47 ± 1:00, P < .001), as well as greater SJL (1:36 ± 0:40 vs 1:15 ± 0:39, P < .001), compared to children with non-evening chronotype. However, there was no significant difference in weekday-to-weekend bedtime discrepancy between children with evening-type and those with non-evening chronotype (0:42 ± 0:46 vs 0:41 ± 0:40, P = .766). Higher ME score (ie, greater evening tendency) was closely related with bedtime resistance (r = .21, P < .001) and sleep onset delay (r = .22, P < .001), as well as internalizing symptoms (r = .20, P < .001) and externalizing symptoms (r = .29, P < .001).

Table 2 shows the regression models on the analyses of the association of chronotype and SJL with insomnia symptoms in school-aged children. Children with evening chronotype were reported to have more bedtime resistance (P = .004) and sleep onset delay (P = .006). Children with higher SJL were reported to have more night waking (P = .022), but the association was regarded as insignificant when the Bonferroni correction was applied.

Table 3 shows the regression models on the analyses of the association of chronotype and SJL with emotional and behavioral problems. Neither evening chronotype nor SJL was associated with internalizing symptoms. Internalizing symptoms were significantly associated with bedtime resistance (P = .003). Meanwhile, externalizing symptoms were related to shorter average sleep duration (P < .001) and insomnia symptoms, including sleep onset delay (P < .001) and night waking (P = .002). Evening chronotype was also related with externalizing symptoms (P < .001), and their association remained significant after control for potential confounders such as insomnia symptoms (P = .001).

## DISCUSSION

## RESULTS
Descriptive characteristics of the sample are shown in Table 1. The children included in the current sample had an average age of 10.06 (standard deviation [SD] 1.16) years and 58.7% (n = 364) were boys. Average sleep duration was 8:20 (0:49) hours during weekdays, 9:16 (1:03) hours during weekends, and 8:37 (0:44) hours across a week. The mean ME score was 32.51 (5.18) in the overall sample. In the subsample with actigraphic data (n = 13), the Children’s The present study extended previous research on the association of chronotype and social jetlag with insomnia symptoms and mental health by focusing particularly on a younger population, ie, school-age children. In line with the evidence from the adult studies, we found that evening chronotype was associated with increased insomnia symptoms. In addition, evening chronotype was found to be independently associated with increased behavioral problems in children. However, social jetlag was not found to be related to either insomnia symptoms or emotional and behavioral problems in school-age children. # Associations of insomnia and emotional and behavioral problems

## Table 1—Sample characteristics

| Characteristic                                           | Total (n = 620)         | NE-Type (n = 426)           | E-Type (n = 186)                  | Statistical Value | P      |
|---------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------------|-------------------|--------|
| Age, mean (SD), y                                       | 10.06 (1.16)            | 9.98 (1.14)                 | 10.22 (1.18)                      | 22.31             | .021   |
| Boys, n (%)                                             | 364 (58.7)              | 258 (60.6)                  | 102 (54.8)                        | 1.89d             | .186   |
| Family income, HKD/mo, n (%)                            |                         |                             |                                   | 1.86d             | .395   |
| < 30,000                                               | 108 (17.4)              | 80 (19.6)                   | 27 (15.0)                         |                   |        |
| 30,001–50,000                                          | 178 (28.7)              | 118 (28.9)                  | 57 (31.7)                         |                   |        |
| > 50,001                                               | 309 (49.8)              | 210 (51.3)                  | 96 (53.3)                         |                   |        |
| Recruited school, n (%)                                |                         |                             |                                   | 0.66d             | .418   |
| Early school start timea                               | 306 (49.4)              | 207 (68.1)                  | 97 (31.9)                         |                   |        |
| Late school start timeb                                | 314 (50.6)              | 219 (71.1)                  | 89 (28.9)                         |                   |        |
| Average sleep duration, mean (SD)                      |                         |                             |                                   |                   |        |
| Across a week                                          | 8:37 (0:44)             | 8:42 (0:43)                 | 8:25 (0:44)                       | 4.56              | < .001 |
| Weekday                                                | 8:20 (0:49)             | 8:29 (0:47)                 | 8:02 (0:48)                       | 6.18              | < .001 |
| Weekend                                                | 9:16 (1:03)             | 9:16 (0:59)                 | 9:19 (1:11)                       | 20.49             | .621   |
| Discrepancy in sleep duration, mean (SD)              | 0:56 (1:08)             | 0:47 (1:02)                 | 1:16 (1:16)                       | 24.70             | < .001 |
| Average bedtime, mean (SD)                             |                         |                             |                                   |                   |        |
| Across a week                                          | 22:16 (0:44)            | 22:06 (0:42)                | 22:42 (0:39)                      | 29.84             | < .001 |
| Weekday                                                | 22:05 (0:47)            | 21:55 (0:46)                | 22:30 (0:42)                      | 29.26             | < .001 |
| Weekend                                                | 22:47 (0:50)            | 22:35 (0:46)                | 23:12 (0:48)                      | 28.86             | < .001 |
| Discrepancy in bedtime, mean (SD)                     | 0:42 (0:43)             | 0:41 (0:40)                 | 0:42 (0:46)                       | 20.31             | .756   |
| Average rise time, mean (SD)                           |                         |                             |                                   |                   |        |
| Across a week                                          | 7:19 (0:27)             | 7:13 (0:26)                 | 7:32 (0:25)                       | 28.26             | < .001 |
| Weekday                                                | 6:45 (0:24)             | 6:43 (0:24)                 | 6:50 (0:24)                       | 23.08             | .002   |
| Weekend                                                | 8:46 (1:02)             | 8:30 (0:58)                 | 9:20 (0:34)                       | 29.38             | < .001 |
| Discrepancy in rise time, mean (SD)                   | 2:01 (1:04)             | 1:47 (1:00)                 | 2:30 (1:01)                       | 27.69             | < .001 |
| Social jetlag, mean (SD)                               | 1:22 (0:41)             | 1:15 (0:39)                 | 1:36 (0:40)                       | 25.94             | < .001 |
| Sleep problem, n (%)c                                  | 357 (57.6)              | 205 (53.5)                  | 147 (87.0)                        | 56.37d            | < .001 |
| Insomnia symptoms, (CSHQ subscale scores) mean (SD)   |                         |                             |                                   |                   |        |
| Bedtime resistance                                      | 8.01 (2.19)             | 7.79 (2.12)                 | 8.46 (2.28)                       | 23.42             | .001   |
| Sleep onset delay                                       | 1.30 (0.56)             | 1.24 (0.52)                 | 1.44 (0.62)                       | 23.94             | < .001 |
| Night waking                                            | 3.36 (0.76)             | 3.34 (0.73)                 | 3.38 (0.79)                       | 20.63             | .530   |
| Mental health outcomes, (SDQ subscale scores) mean (SD)|                         |                             |                                   |                   |        |
| Internalizing symptoms                                   | 4.71 (3.00)             | 4.46 (2.97)                 | 5.24 (2.98)                       | 22.94             | .003   |
| Externalizing symptoms                                   | 6.20 (3.38)             | 5.76 (3.20)                 | 7.10 (3.50)                       | 24.59             | < .001 |

The prevalence of overall sleep problems in our sample (57.6%) was comparable to that of previous reports based on the Chinese population. For example, in a previous study conducted in 912 Chinese children aged 6–14 years, 69.3% were found to have general sleep disturbances (scoring higher than 41 on CSHQ). In a cross-cultural study comparing the sleep pattern between children in the United States and those in China, the average CSHQ total score was 38.71 (SD 5.51) in the U.S. children and 42.11 (SD 7.43) in the Chinese children, while the average CSHQ total score was 44.98 (SD 7.14) in our current study. The observed difference in the prevalence of sleep problems between Hong Kong children and their Western counterparts may be due to the discrepancies in sleeping arrangements (eg, cosleeping), parental attitudes toward children’s normal sleep patterns, and use of different definitions of sleep problems across studies. According to the National Sleep Foundation, 9–11 hours of sleep is usually recommended for school-age children. The children in this study were sleep-restricted during weekdays and tended to compensate for their sleep debt by getting up later and sleeping longer on weekends. This unmet sleep need during weekdays might have been due to Table 2—Results of the linear regression analyses on the associations of chronotype and SJL with insomnia symptoms.

| Variable                      | Bedtime Resistance | 95% CI               | P     | Sleep Onset Delay | 95% CI               | P     | Night Waking | 95% CI               | P     |
|-------------------------------|--------------------|----------------------|-------|-------------------|----------------------|-------|--------------|----------------------|-------|
| Age                           | 20.37*             | 20.54 to –0.20*     | < .001* | 0.01              | 0.03 to 0.05         | .687  | 20.03        | 20.09 to 0.03        | .310  |
| Female                        | 20.09              | 20.48 to 0.31       | .672  | 0.09              | 20.01 to 0.19        | .071  | 0.03         | 20.10 to 0.17        | .649  |
| Early school start time      | 20.40              | 20.79 to –0.02      | .041  | 20.13             | 20.23 to –0.03       | .009  | 0.03         | 20.10 to 0.16        | .634  |
| Average sleep duration        | 20.38*             | 20.65 to –0.12*     | .005* | 20.10             | 20.17 to –0.04*      | .003* | 20.05        | 20.14 to 0.04        | .289  |
| Evening chronotype           | 0.63*              | 0.21 to 1.01*       | .004* | 0.15              | 0.04 to 0.26*        | .006* | 0.01         | 20.14 to 0.16        | .884  |
| Social jetlag                | 0.17               | 20.12 to 0.45       | .250  | 0.07              | 20.002 to 0.14       | .056  | 0.12         | 0.02 to 0.21         | .022  |

Adjusted for the child’s age, sex, recruited school, and average sleep duration. *Statistical significance at P < .007. B = unstandardized regression coefficients, CI = confidence interval, SJL = social jetlag.

In addition, early school start time might have induced the discrepancy between the desired and scheduled rise time and exaggerated circadian misalignment. The SDQ internalizing and externalizing scores (ie, 4.7 and 6.2) of the current sample were comparable to previous local community data (internalizing score ranging from 3.0 to 5.1, and externalizing score ranging from 4.2 to 6.7).

We found that children with evening chronotype had shorter sleep duration especially during weekdays compared to their counterparts with non-evening chronotype. Children with evening chronotype also tended to sleep longer during weekends, which might reflect their compensation for sleep loss accumulated during weekdays. In addition, children with evening chronotype generally had later bedtime and greater social jetlag compared with their non-evening type peers. These observations are consistent with those of previous studies conducted in adolescents and young adults. Previous cross-cultural studies showed that Asian children tend to have later bedtime than North American children, while school-age children in Hong Kong have even later bedtime and more prominent weekend oversleep than their counterparts living in mainland China. Moreover, early morning school start time has been found to further exacerbate sleep deficits and social jetlag in school-age children, especially for those with evening tendency.

Table 3—Results of the linear regression analyses on the associations of chronotype and SJL with internalizing and externalizing symptoms.

| Variable                      | Internalizing Symptoms (Model 1a) | 95% CI           | P     | Internalizing Symptoms (Model 2b) | 95% CI           | P     | Externalizing Symptoms (Model 1a) | 95% CI           | P     | Externalizing Symptoms (Model 2b) | 95% CI           | P     |
|-------------------------------|-----------------------------------|------------------|-------|-----------------------------------|------------------|-------|------------------------------------|------------------|-------|-----------------------------------|------------------|-------|
| Age                           | 20.09                             | 20.32 to 0.15    | .461  | 20.03                             | 20.27 to 0.20    | .780  | 20.36*                             | 20.62 to 0.005*  | < .001*| 20.36                             | 20.61 to 0.005   | < .001*|
| Female                        | 20.27                             | 20.82 to 0.27    | .327  | 20.32                             | 20.86 to 0.23    | .252  | 21.20*                             | 21.79 to < .001* | < .001*| 21.26*                            | 21.84 to < .001* | < .001*|
| Early school start time      | 20.22                             | 20.76 to 0.32    | .426  | 20.17                             | 20.70 to 0.37    | .547  | 0.28                              | 20.86 to 0.337   | .337  | 20.17                             | 20.75 to 0.40    | .553  |
| Family income                | 20.36                             | 20.70 to –0.02   | .039  | 20.27                             | 20.61 to 0.07    | .124  | 20.54*                             | 20.90 to 0.004*  | < .001*| 20.44                             | 20.81 to 0.018   | .018  |
| Average sleep duration        | 20.60*                            | 20.96 to –0.23*  | .002* | 20.44                             | 20.85 to –0.09    | .015  | 20.87*                             | 21.27 to < .001* | < .001*| 20.72*                            | 21.11 to < .001* | < .001*|
| Bedtime resistance            | 2                                 | 2                | 2     | 0.18*                            | 0.06 to 0.003*   | .003* | 2                                  | 2                | 2     | 0.09                             | 20.04 to 0.180   | .180  |
| Sleep onset delay             | 2                                 | 2                | 2     | 0.46                             | 20.02 to 0.060    | .060  | 2                                  | 2                | 2     | 1.03*                            | 0.51 to < .001*  | < .001*|
| Night waking                  | 2                                 | 2                | 2     | 0.28                             | 20.09 to 0.134    | .134  | 2                                  | 2                | 2     | 0.62*                            | 0.24 to 0.002*   | .002* |
| Evening chronotype            | 0.72                             | 0.12 to .018      | .018  | 0.53                             | 0.08 to 0.082     | .082  | 1.30*                             | 0.66 to < .001*  | < .001*| 1.11*                            | 0.47 to .001*    | .001* |
| Social jetlag                 | 20.13                             | 20.54 to 0.27    | .521  | 20.24                             | 20.64 to 0.16     | .242  | 20.14                             | 20.58 to 0.29     | .521  | 20.33                             | 20.75 to 0.10     | .138  |

*Statistical significance at P < .007 for model 1 and at P < .005 for model 2. a Model 1: Adjusted for the child’s age, sex, recruited school, family income, and average sleep duration. b Model 2: Adjusted for the child’s age, sex, family income and average sleep duration, and insomnia symptoms (ie, bedtime resistance, sleep onset delay and night waking). B = unstandardized regression coefficients, CI = confidential interval, SJL = social jetlag. ## Associations of insomnia and emotional and behavioral problems

Evening chronotype, but not social jetlag, was found to be significantly associated with insomnia symptoms in the current study. Children with evening chronotype were found to have longer sleep onset latency in a previous study conducted among preschoolers. In light of the observation that insomnia may persist over time from childhood to adolescence, and may be associated with various detrimental outcomes, our findings suggest the need to consider circadian factors from a developmental perspective in the assessment and management of childhood insomnia, especially among school-age girls.

Children with evening chronotype were found to have increased externalizing symptoms. This observation was consistent with that of the studies conducted in preschoolers and adolescents, which showed that evening chronotype is related to poor mental health outcomes, such as conduct and hyperactivity/inattentive problems, and poor behavioral self-regulation. Moreover, in line with findings in adults, we also found that evening chronotype was a risk factor, independent of insomnia symptoms, for mental health problems in the younger population. Circadian rhythm dysregulation might be one of the potential factors linking sleep and mental health problems. For example, a significant delay in circadian phase and reduced circadian rhythm amplitude have been observed in the patients with ADHD. Meanwhile, hyperactivity during the night has been shown to be associated with alterations in circadian profiles. In the current study, internalizing symptoms were not found to be associated with circadian factors after considering the effects of insomnia symptoms. This finding may be explained by several possible reasons. First, a previous longitudinal study has found that internalizing symptoms were not persistent during childhood and adolescence. As such, the associations of internalizing symptoms with sleep and circadian factors might not be captured in the one-off assessment. Second, emotional problems were measured by parental report in the current study, which could be affected by parental mental health and parenting style. Nonetheless, internalizing and externalizing symptoms may share some common psychopathologies during childhood. For example, early onset depression was found to be associated with not only the genetic risk of depression but also of attention-deficit and hyperactivity disorder. Longitudinal evidence further suggests that externalizing symptoms in childhood are related to an increased risk of developing internalizing problems, such as anxiety and mood disorders. Taken together, our results underscored that circadian preference might be implicated in the mental health problems in school-age children.

Although social jetlag could be a predictor of poor mental well-being, an insignificant association of social jetlag with emotional and behavioral problems was found in the current sample. Moreover, the association between social jetlag and poor sleep quality, which has often been reported in adults, was not found in school-age children. It has been speculated that the effect of social jetlag might be cumulative in terms of either severity or duration. This speculation is supported by the study conducted by Biggs and colleagues, in which only children with weekday-to-weekend bedtime shift over 2 hours showed a significant increase in behavioral problems. Further research is warranted to test the dose-dependent effects of social jetlag using a longitudinal design, while taking other sleep and circadian features into account.

## ABBREVIATIONS

- CSHQ, Children’s Sleep Habits Questionnaire
- E-type, evening chronotype
- ME, morningess/eveningness
- NE-type, non-evening chronotype
- SD, standard deviation
- SDQ, Strength and Difficulties Questionnaire
- SJL, social jetlag Associations of insomnia and emotional and behavioral problems

| Reference Number | Authors | Title | Journal | Year | Volume | Pages |
|------------------|---------|-------|---------|------|--------|-------|
| 1 | Goodman R. | The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire: a research note. | J Child Psychol Psychiatry | 1997 | 38(5) | 581–586 |
| 2 | Bourdon KH, Goodman R, Rae DS, Simpson G, Koretz DS. | The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire: U.S. normative data and psychometric properties. | J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry | 2005 | 44(6) | 557–564 |
| 3 | Moriwaki A, Kamio Y. | Normative data and psychometric properties of the strengths and difficulties questionnaire among Japanese school-aged children. | Child Adolesc Psychiatry Ment Health | 2014 | 8(1) | 1–12 |
| 4 | Lai KYC, Luk ESL, Leung PWL, Wong ASY, Law L, Ho K. | Validation of the Chinese version of the strengths and difficulties questionnaire in Hong Kong. | Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol | 2010 | 45(12) | 1179–1186 |
| 5 | Hannigan LJ, Walaker N, Waszczuk MA, McAdams TA, Eley TC. | Aetiological influences on stability and change in emotional and behavioural problems across development: a systematic review. | Psychopathol Rev | 2016 | a4(1) | 52–108 |
| 6 | Fanti KA, Henrich CC. | Trajectories of pure and co-occurring internalizing and externalizing problems from age 2 to age 12: findings from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Study of Early Child Care. | Dev Psychol | 2010 | 46(5) | 1159–1175 |
| 7 | Lee EJ, Bukowski WM. | Co-development of internalizing and externalizing problem behaviors: causal direction and common vulnerability. | J Adolesc | 2012 | 35(3) | 713–729 |
| 8 | Petersen IT, Lindhiem O, LeBeau B, et al. | Development of internalizing problems from adolescence to emerging adulthood: accounting for heterotypic continuity with vertical scaling. | Dev Psychol | 2018 | 54(3) | 586–599 |
| 9 | Leadbeater BJ, Kuperminc GP, Blatt SJ, Hertzog C. | A multivariate model of gender differences in adolescents’ internalizing and externalizing problems. | Dev Psychol | 1999 | 35(5) | 1268–1282 |
| 10 | Costello EJ, Mustillo S, Erkanli A, Keeler G, Angold A. | Prevalence and development of psychiatric disorders in childhood and adolescence. | Arch Gen Psychiatry | 2003 | 60(8) | 837–844 |
| 11 | Kunze B, Wang B, Isensee C, et al; BELLA Study Group. | Gender associated developmental trajectories of SDQ-dysregulation profile and its predictors in children. | Psychol Med | 2018 | 48(3) | 404–415 |
| 12 | Brown KM, Malow BA. | Pediatric insomnia. | Chest | 2016 | 149(5) | 1332–1339 |
| 13 | Owens JA, Mindell JA. | Pediatric insomnia. | Pediatr Clin North Am | 2011 | 58(3) | 555–569 |
| 14 | Zhang J, Lam SP, Li SX, Li AM, Lai KY, Wing YK. | Longitudinal course and outcome of chronic insomnia in Hong Kong Chinese children: a 5-year follow-up study of a community-based cohort. | Sleep | 2011 | 34(10) | 1395–1402 |
| 15 | Honaker SM, Meltzer LJ. | Sleep in pediatric primary care: a review of the literature. | Sleep Med Rev | 2016 | 25 | 31–39 |
| 16 | Combs D, Goodwin JL, Quan SF, Morgan WJ, Shetty S, Parthasarathy S. | Insomnia, health-related quality of life and health outcomes in children: a seven year longitudinal cohort. | Sci Rep | 2016 | 6 | 27921 |
| 17 | Armstrong JM, Ruttle PL, Klein MH, Essex MJ, Benca RM. | Associations of child insomnia, sleep movement, and their persistence with mental health symptoms in childhood and adolescence. | Sleep | 2014 | 37(5) | 901–909 |
| 18 | Carvalho Bos S, Gomes A, Clemente V, et al. | Sleep and behavioral/emotional problems in children: a population-based study. | Sleep Med | 2009 | 10(1) | 66–74 |
| 19 | Zhang J, Li AM, Kong APS, Lai KYC, Tang NLS, Wing YK. | A community-based study of insomnia in Hong Kong Chinese children: prevalence, risk factors and familial aggregation. | Sleep Med | 2009 | 10(9) | 1040–1046 |
| 20 | Flynn-Evans EE, Shekleton JA, Miller B, et al. | Circadian phase and phase angle disorders in primary insomnia. | Sleep | 2017 | 40(12) |  |
| 21 | LeBourgeois MK, Wright KP Jr, LeBourgeois HB, Jenni OG. | Dissonance between parent-selected bedtimes and young children’s circadian physiology influences nighttime settling difficulties. | Mind Brain Educ | 2013 | 7(4) | 234–242 |
| 22 | Hagenauer MH, Lee TM. | The neuroendocrine control of the circadian system: adolescent chronotype. | Front Neuroendocrinol | 2012 | 33(3) | 211–229 |
| 23 | Randler C, Faßl C, Kalb N. | From lark to owl: developmental changes in morningness-eveningness from new-borns to early adulthood. | Sci Rep | 2017 | 7(March) | 45874 |
| 24 | Li S, Zhu S, Jin X, et al. | Risk factors associated with short sleep duration among Chinese school-aged children. | Sleep Med | 2010 | 11(9) | 907–916 |
| 25 | Chan NY, Zhang J, Yu MWM, et al. | Impact of a modest delay in school start time in Hong Kong school adolescents. | Sleep Med | 2017 | 30 | 164–170 |
| 26 | Wittmann M, Dinich J, Merrow M, Roenneberg T. | Social jetlag: misalignment of biological and social time. | Chronobiol Int | 2006 | 23(1-2) | 497–509 |
| 27 | Lau EYY, Wong ML, Ng ECW, Hui CC, Cheung SF, Mok DSY. | “Social jetlag” in morning-type college students living on campus: implications for physical and psychological well-being. | Chronobiol Int | 2013 | 30(7) | 910–918 |
| 28 | Levandovski R, Dantas G, Fernandes LC, et al. | Depression scores associate with chronotype and social jetlag in a rural population. | Chronobiol Int | 2011 | 28(9) | 771–778 |
| 29 | Gau SS-F, Shang C-Y, Merikangas KR, Chiu Y-N, Soong W-T, Cheng AT-A. | Association between morningness-eveningness and behavioral/emotional problems among adolescents. | J Biol Rhythms | 2007 | 22(3) | 268–274 |
| 30 | Haynie DL, Lewin D, Luk JW, et al. | Beyond sleep duration: bidirectional associations among chronotype, social jetlag, and drinking behaviors in a longitudinal sample of us high school students. | Sleep | 2018 | 41(2) | 1–14 |
| 31 | Owens JA, Spirito A, McGuinn M. | The Children’s Sleep Habits Questionnaire (CSHQ): psychometric properties of a survey instrument for school-aged children. | Sleep | 2000 | 23(8) | 1043–1051 |
| 32 | Li SH, Jin XM, Shen XM, et al. | [Development and psychometric properties of the Chinese version of Children’s Sleep Habits Questionnaire]. | Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi | 2007 | 45(3) | 176–180 |
| 33 | Werner H, Lebourgeois MK, Geiger A, Jenni OG. | Assessment of chronotype in four-to eleven-year-old children: reliability and validity of the Children’s Chronotype Questionnaire (CCTQ). | Chronobiol Int | 2009 | 26(5) | 992–1014 |
| 34 | Goodman A, Lamping DL, Ploubidis GB. | When to use broader internalising and externalising subscales instead of the hypothesised five subscales on the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ): data from British parents, teachers and children. | Child Psychol | 2010 | 38 | 1179–1191 |
| 35 | Wang G, Xu G, Liu Z, Lu N, Ma R, Zhang E. | Sleep patterns and sleep disturbances among Chinese school-aged children: prevalence and associated factors. | Sleep Med | 2013 | 14(1) | 45–52 |
| 36 | Liu X, Liu L, Owens JA, Kaplan DL. | Sleep patterns and sleep problems among schoolchildren in the United States and China. | Pediatrics | 2005 | 115(Suppl 1) | 241–249 |
| 37 | Li S, Jin X, Yan C, Wu S, Jiang F, Shen X. | Bed- and room-sharing in Chinese school-aged children: prevalence and association with sleep behaviors. | Sleep Med | 2008 | 9(5) | 555–563 |
| 38 | Biggs SN, Pizzorno VA, van den Heuvel CJ, Kennedy JD, Martin AJ, Lushington K. | Differences in parental attitudes towards sleep and associations with sleep-wake patterns in Caucasian and Southeast Asian school-aged children in Australia. | Behav Sleep Med | 2010 | 8(4) | 207–218 |
| 39 | Sadeh A, Mindell J, Rivera L. | “My child has a sleep problem”: a cross-cultural comparison of parental definitions. | Sleep Med | 2011 | 12(5) | 478–482 |
| 40 | Hirshkowitz M, Whiton K, Albert SM, et al. | National Sleep Foundation’s updated sleep duration recommendations: final report. | Sleep Heal | 2015 | 1(4) | 233–243 |
| 41 | Carissimi A, Dresch F, Martins AC, et al. | The influence of school time on sleep patterns of children and adolescents. | Sleep Med | 2016 | 19 | 33–39 |
| 42 | Vitale JA, Roveda E, Montaruli A, et al. | Chronotype influences activity circadian rhythm and sleep: differences in sleep quality between weekdays and weekend. | Chronobiol Int | 2015 | 32(3) | 405–415 |
| 43 | Park YM, Matsumoto K, Seo YJ, Shinkoda H. | Sleep and chronotype for children in Japan. | Percept Mot Skills | 1999 | 88(3 Suppl) | 1315–1329 |
| 44 | Gau SF, Soong WT. | The transition of sleep-wake patterns in early adolescence. | Sleep | 2003 | 26(4) | 449–454 |
| 45 | Sivertsen B, Pallesen S, Stormark KM, Bøe T, Lundervold AJ, Hysing M. | Delayed sleep phase syndrome in adolescents: prevalence and correlates in a large population based study. | BMC Public Health | 2013 | 13(1) | 1163 |
| 46 | Gradisar M, Gardner G, Dohnt H. | Recent worldwide sleep patterns and problems during adolescence: a review and meta-analysis of age, region, and sleep. | Sleep Med | 2011 | 12(2) | 110–118 |
| 47 | Wang G, Zhang J, Lam SP, et al. | Ten-year secular trends in sleep/wake patterns in Shanghai and Hong Kong school-aged children: a tale of two cities. | J Clin Sleep Med | 2019 | 15(10) | 1495–1502 | 48. Doi Y, Ishihara K, Uchiyama M. Associations of chronotype with social jetlag and behavioral problems in preschool children. Chronobiol Int. 2015;32(8):1101–1108
49. Baglioni C, Battagliese G, Feige B, et al. Insomnia as a predictor of depression: a meta-analytic evaluation of longitudinal epidemiological studies. J Affect Disord. 2011;135(1-3):10–19
50. Li SX, Chan NY, Yu MWM, et al. Eveningness chronotype, insomnia symptoms, and emotional and behavioural problems in adolescents. In: 4th International Pediatric Sleep Association Congress (IPSA 2016); March 10–13, 2016; Taipei, Taiwan. Rochester, MN: International Pediatric Sleep Association
51. Owens JA, Dearth-Wesley T, Lewin D, Gioia G, Whitaker RC. Self-regulation and sleep duration, sleepiness, and chronotype in adolescents. Pediatrics. 2016;138(6): e20161406
52. Sheaves B, Porcheret K, Tsanas A, et al. Insomnia, nightmares, and chronotype as markers of risk for severe mental illness: results from a student population. Sleep. 2016;39(1):173–181
53. Wulff K, Gatti S, Wettstein JG, Foster RG. Sleep and circadian rhythm disruption in psychiatric and neurodegenerative disease. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2010;11(8):589–599
54. Bijlenga D, Van Someren EJW, Gruber R, et al. Body temperature, activity and melatonin profiles in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and delayed sleep: a case-control study. J Sleep Res. 2013;22(6):607–616
55. Imeraj L, Sonuga-Barke E, Antrop I, et al. Altered circadian profiles in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: an integrative review and theoretical framework for future studies. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2012;36(8):1897–1919
56. Van Veen MM, Kooij JJS, Boonstra AM, Gordijn MCM, Van Someren EJW. Delayed circadian rhythm in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and chronic sleep-onset insomnia. Biol Psychiatry. 2010;67(11):1091–1096
57. Baird AL, Coogan AN, Siddiqui A, Donev RM, Thome J. Adult attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder is associated with alterations in circadian rhythms at the behavioural, endocrine and molecular levels. Mol Psychiatry. 2012;17(10):988–995
58. Betts KS, Baker P, Alati R, et al. The natural history of internalizing behaviours from adolescence to emerging adulthood: findings from the Australian Temperament Project. Psychol Med. 2016;46(13):2815–2827
59. Yap MBH, Jorm AF. Parental factors associated with childhood anxiety, depression, and internalizing problems: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Affect Disord. 2015;175:424–440
60. Rice F, Riglin L, Thapar AK, et al. Characterizing developmental trajectories and the role of neuropsychiatric genetic risk variants in early-onset depression. JAMA Psychiatry. 2019;76(3):306-313
61. Reef J, Diamantopoulou S, van Meurs I, Verhulst FC, van der Ende J. Developmental trajectories of child to adolescent externalizing behavior and adult DSM-IV disorder: results of a 24-year longitudinal study. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2011;46(12):1233–1241
62. Biggs SN, Lushington K, van den Heuvel CJ, Martin AJ, Kennedy JD. Inconsistent sleep schedules and daytime behavioral difficulties in school-aged children. Sleep Med. 2011;12(8):780–786
63. Kobayashi K, Yorifuji T, Yamakawa M, et al. Poor toddler-age sleep schedules predict school-age behavioral disorders in a longitudinal survey. Brain Dev. 2015;37(6): 572–578
64. Kelly Y, Kelly J, Sacker A. Changes in bedtime schedules and behavioral difficulties in 7 year old children. Pediatrics. 2013;132(5):e1184–e1193
65. McMahon DM, Burch JB, Wirth MD, et al. Persistence of social jetlag and sleep disruption in healthy young adults. Chronobiol Int. 2018;35(3):312–328
66. Tavernier R, Munroe M, Willoughby T. Perceived morningness-eveningness predicts academic adjustment and substance use across university, but social jetlag is not to blame. Chronobiol Int. 2015;32(9):1233–1245
67. Mazza S, Bastuji H, Rey AE. Objective and subjective assessments of sleep in children: comparison of actigraphy, sleep diary completed by children and parents’ estimation. Front Psychiatry. 2020;11:495
68. Schlarb AA, Bihlmaier I, Velten-schurian K, et al. Short- and long-term effects of CBT-I in groups for school-age children suffering from chronic insomnia: the KiSS-Program. Behav Sleep Med. 2016;16(4):380–397
69. Bei B, Wiley JF, Trinder J, Manber R. Beyond the mean: a systematic review on the correlates of daily intraindividual variability of sleep/wake patterns. Sleep Med Rev. 2016;28:108–124

SUBMISSION & CORRESPONDENCE INFORMATION

Submitted for publication November 25, 2020
Submitted in final revised form April 20, 2021
Accepted for publication April 20, 2021
Address correspondence to: Dr. Shirley X. Li, PhD, DClinPsy, Department of Psychology, The University of Hong Kong; Tel: 852-3917-7035; Fax: 852-28583518, Email: Shirley.li@hku.hk

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT

All the authors have read and approved the manuscript. Work for this study was performed in the Sleep Research Clinic and Laboratory, Department of Psychology, The University of Hong Kong. The study was supported by the Seed Fund for Basic Research, University Research Committee, The University of Hong Kong. The funding body had no involvement in the study design and the collection, analysis, and interpretation of the data, the writing of the report, or the decision to submit the paper for publication. The funding was awarded to Dr. Shirley Xin Li. The authors report no conflicts of interest.

Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, Vol. 17, No. 10 2114 October 1, 2021 