# Adolescent sleep duration: associations with social-cognitive determinants and the mediating role of sleep hygiene practices

## Summary
Insufficient sleep duration among adolescents is a widespread public health problem. Gaining better insight into social-cognitive determinants associated with adolescent sleep duration is necessary for developing effective preventive interventions to support healthy sleep. This study aimed to explore whether social-cognitive determinants regarding sufficient sleep duration were associated with sleep duration, and if these associations were mediated by collective sleep hygiene practices. Furthermore, we examined these associations for social-cognitive determinants related to not using media before bedtime and doing relaxing activities and considered whether these associations were mediated by specific sleep hygiene practices. Data were collected amongst second- and third-grade adolescents from 10 Dutch high schools. A total of 878 adolescents (mean [SD] age 13.3 [0.71] years) completed data on sleep duration, social-cognitive determinants of the Theory of Planned Behaviour (i.e., attitude, subjective norms from parents, subjective norms from peers, perceived behavioural control, intention), and sleep hygiene practices. Single- and multivariable path models were constructed and mediation by sleep hygiene practices was analysed by Monte Carlo simulation. All social-cognitive determinants except for subjective norms from peers were associated with longer sleep duration (p < 0.01). Sleep hygiene practices mediated all associations between social-cognitive determinants and sleep duration (mediation ranging from 16% to 72%). Although some of the significant associations and mediation disappeared in the multivariable model, behavioural arousal was the strongest mediator, but collective sleep hygiene practices and cognitive/emotional arousal also explained parts of the associations. The findings indicate that social-cognitive factors should not be overlooked when targeting adolescent sleep duration.

## K E Y W O R D S
adolescents, health promotion, sleep health, sleep hygiene practices, Theory of Planned Behaviour ## INTRODUCTION

Short sleep duration is a prevalent and serious problem that negatively impacts upon various aspects of adolescents’ mental and physical health. Poor sleep increases, amongst other things, the risk of depression, mood disturbances and obesity, while also negatively impacting upon adolescents’ cognitive development, learning ability, and emotion regulation. According to the National Sleep Foundation, the recommended sleep duration for children aged 6–13 year is 9–11 h, while for adolescents aged 14–17 years 8–10 h a night is recommended. Unfortunately, these recommendations are often not met. In the Netherlands, more than half (51.5%) of adolescents aged 14–17 years sleep less than the recommended amount, while only 38.8% of 13-year-old adolescents adhere to the recommendation (sleep duration of 8.21 h). Given the high prevalence of short sleep duration and the attendant detrimental effects of unhealthy sleep, effective preventative interventions to promote adolescent sleep health are needed.

In order to develop such effective preventative interventions, it is first necessary to gain insight into the factors that underlie adolescents’ sleep habits. Adolescent sleep health is the result of a complex interplay between many determinants across different levels of the social-ecological model of health. At the individual level, certain theoretical behavioural models can aid our understanding of the underlying social psychological processes of a behaviour such as sleep. For example, the Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB) states that behaviour is determined by the intention to engage in that particular behaviour, which, in turn, is determined by social-cognitive determinants, namely attitude, subjective norms, and the perceived behavioural control towards the behaviour. The TPB has proved successful in predicting intentions and various types of health-related behaviours. Whilst the TPB has also been applied to better understand several sleep-related behaviours, these studies were mainly carried out amongst college students. As the extent to which the TPB explains behaviour can differ by age, it is important to also gain insight into the context of adolescents. One of the relatively few studies that have been carried out amongst adolescents found that attitude, subjective norms, and perceived behavioural control were associated with the intention to perform healthy sleep-related behaviours. In another study, adolescents who experienced strong and positive subjective norms from their parents and peers towards sleeping sufficiently, had greater perceived behavioural control to go to bed on time, as well as demonstrating stronger intentions to sleep more. Although these aforementioned studies provide useful and much needed additions to extant literature, to the best of our knowledge, there is a relative dearth of research examining whether social-cognitive factors are associated with actual sleep duration amongst adolescents.

Notwithstanding the potential role of social-cognitive determinants in adolescent sleep, it is not expected that these determinants directly influence sleep duration, but rather indirectly via sleep hygiene practices. Sleep hygiene practices comprise a set of behavioural and environmental factors across nine domains, including, amongst other things, the avoidance of alcohol, caffeine and nicotine use, limited technology usage before bed, and establishing a relaxing sleep environment, and thereby have the potential to increase sleep opportunity. In the handful of prior studies on sleep hygiene practices amongst adolescents, positive associations were indeed found between sleep hygiene practices and adherence to age-appropriate bedtimes, achieving sufficient sleep duration, and a decreased sleep onset latency (SOL; i.e., the length of time it takes to fall asleep while in bed).

Behavioural arousal and cognitive/emotional arousal are two domains of sleep hygiene practices that may be of significant importance for adolescent sleep. Behavioural arousal can derive from activating behaviours prior to bedtime, such as, for example, the use of technology or media. Indeed, technology usage at bedtime is highly prevalent amongst adolescents and is associated with negative sleep outcomes including delayed bedtimes and shorter sleep duration. The presence of pre-sleep cognitive/emotional arousal, which are ruminating behaviours and negative emotions at bedtime, are also especially prevalent in adolescents. Cognitive/emotional arousal exhibits many similarities with the construct of pre-sleep worries, which is primarily associated with reduced sleep quality. Whilst sleep hygiene practices have been found to influence sleep outcomes, to the best of our knowledge, no study has investigated whether these sleep hygiene practices can explain the underlying mechanism of social-cognitive determinants and adolescent sleep duration, and, more specifically, whether this also applies to specific components of sleep hygiene practices (i.e., behavioural arousal and cognitive/emotional arousal).

Therefore, this study aimed to explore whether social-cognitive determinants are associated with sleep duration amongst Dutch adolescents, and, moreover, whether sleep hygiene practices mediate these associations. To do so, we assessed social-cognitive determinants regarding sufficient sleep duration, in addition to both media usage prior to bedtime and engaging in relaxing activities. We assessed the mediating role of collective sleep hygiene practices, but also specifically by behavioural arousal and cognitive/emotional arousal, in order to explore whether subdomains of sleep hygiene practices could explain the underlying mechanism of social-cognitive determinants and sleep duration.

## METHODS

### Design

The present study used baseline data from the larger Charge Your Brainzzz study. The data were collected between September and November 2018. This study was approved by the Vrije Universiteit (VU) Medical Ethical Committee (reference number 2018.248). Weekday mean sleep duration was calculated as the mean of 5 weekday nights when at least 1 night was completed, as determined by calculated intraclass correlation coefficients. It was expected that social-cognitive determinants and sleep hygiene practices would have a larger influence upon weekday sleep duration as opposed to weekend sleep duration. To identify adolescents with insufficient sleep duration, age-specific recommendations of the National Sleep Foundation were used (i.e., <9 h for 11–13-year-olds and <8 h for 14–16-year-olds).

## Study population and recruitment

High schools throughout the Netherlands were recruited to participate in the Charge Your Brainzzz study. Three recruitment strategies were employed: (i) schools were invited to participate in the study when they subscribed to the intervention via the online portal; (ii) four Municipal Health Services promoted the study amongst their network of schools; (iii) the study was promoted amongst biology teachers via an online platform and a magazine for professionals. A total of 10 high schools participated at the baseline measurement. Second- and third-grade classes with an educational level of pre-vocational secondary education (VMBO-T) and higher were allowed to participate and were invited by their school or teacher by means of an information letter about the study. Prior to the measurements, both students and caretakers were asked to provide their active written consent.

## Social-cognitive determinants (TPB)

Social-cognitive determinants (i.e., attitude, subjective norms, perceived behavioural control, and intention) were measured with items related to three dimensions: (i) sufficient sleep duration; (ii) not using media prior to bedtime; (iii) engaging in relaxing activities prior to bedtime. These dimensions were expected to relate to subscales of sleep hygiene practices. The formulation of the items was based on the standard formulations for measuring constructs of the TPB and items were scored on a 5-point Likert scale in which, for example, a higher score indicated a higher experienced subjective norm. Social-cognitive determinants were measured related to each dimension (i.e., sufficient sleep duration; no media usage prior to bedtime; engaging in relaxing activities prior to bedtime). Attitude, perceived behavioural control, and intention consisted of one item. For subjective norms from both parents and peers, the normative beliefs and motivation to comply were measured and mean variables were formed by multiplying the normative belief by the motivation to comply with it. The normative beliefs items were recoded so that higher scores indicated a more positive subjective norm. For more details on the items and answer scales, please see Appendix 1.

## Outcomes and measurements

### Demographic characteristics

Data were obtained on participants’ age, gender, school grade, perceived cultural group and their educational level. For perceived cultural group, the most prevalent cultural groups in the Netherlands were included as response options based on the Dutch Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS). Educational level was divided as follows: pre-vocational secondary education (VMBO-T), senior general secondary education (HAVO) and pre-university education (VWO and Gymnasium).

### Sleep duration

Sleep duration was measured via the Consensus Sleep Diary. Sleep duration (i.e., total minutes of sleep/night) was determined as the difference between bedtime (‘What time did you try to go to sleep?’) and wake up time (‘What time did you wake up?’).

### Sleep hygiene practices

Sleep hygiene practices over the prior month were reported by using the Adolescent Sleep Hygiene Scale (ASHS). The original questionnaire consists of 28 items distributed over nine subscales. A pre-test was conducted to assess the usability of the original ASHS amongst Dutch adolescents, based upon which the ASHS was slightly modified. After being modified, the ASHS contained 25 items distributed over eight subscales. Moreover, each item was scored on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from never = 1 to always = 5. Almost all the items were reverse coded prior to analysis so that higher scores indicated better sleep hygiene practices. Mean scores were formed for all eight subscales. Subscales were based on the subscales of the original instrument, with the exception of two subscales that were based on more recent studies that put forward another composition of subscales: physiological (five items), behavioural (three items), cognitive/ Model                             coefficient                                     Sleep hygiene practices                                        b coefficient
Social-cognitive                                                                    coefficient                                                         Sleep duration
determinants regarding
sufficient sleep duration                                                                 coefficient
Model 2                                                                              Behavioural arousal
coefficient                                                                                                    b coefficient
Social-cognitive regarding                                                           coefficient                                                          Sleep duration
determinants not using media prior to bedtime                                                           coefficient
Model 3                                                                            Cognitive/emotional
coefficient                                                 arousal                                            b coefficient
Social-cognitive                                                                   coefficient                                                          Sleep duration
determinants relaxing
engaging in regarding
activities prior to bedtime                                                                 coefficient

FIGURE 1       Conceptual models of the mediation analyses for Model 1: sleep hygiene practices, Model 2: behavioural arousal, and Model 3: cognitive/emotional arousal

emotional (five items), sleep environment (six items), daytime sleep (one item), substances (two items), bedtime routine (one item), bed/bedroom sharing (two items). Only those participants who completed at least two-thirds of the items comprising a subscale were included. For the analysis of the total ASHS, a mean variable was formed out of the eight subscales. For the mediation analysis, the subscales behavioural arousal and cognitive/emotional arousal were used. The behavioural arousal subscale measures ‘activating behaviours prior to bedtime’ and consists of three items (e.g., ‘During the one-hour period prior to bedtime, I do things that make me feel very awake, for example: gaming, watching television, talking on the phone’). The cognitive/emotional arousal subscale measures ‘rumination behaviours and negative emotional states at bedtime’ and consists of five items (e.g., ‘I go to bed and worry about things happening at home or school’).

Statistical analysis

The associations between social-cognitive determinants and sleep duration were assessed via path models. In addition, we tested whether sleep hygiene practices mediated these associations by performing mediation analyses. Three path models were constructed: Model 1, social-cognitive determinants regarding sufficient sleep duration with collective sleep hygiene practices as a potential mediator; Model 2, social-cognitive determinants regarding not using media prior to bedtime with behavioural arousal as a potential mediator; Model 3, social-cognitive determinants regarding engaging in relaxing activities prior to bedtime, with cognitive/emotional arousal as a potential mediator (Figure 1). Mediation analyses were conducted by using Monte Carlo simulation. For each path model, two models were constructed: (i) a single variable model in which a single social-cognitive determinant was included into the model without adjusting for the other social-cognitive determinants, (ii) a multivariable model in which all other social-cognitive determinants were included. All analyses were adjusted for demographic variables (i.e., age, gender, perceived cultural group, educational level). Participants with data on both the online survey and sleep diary were included in the analyses.

The following associations were estimated in the path models: the associations between social-cognitive determinants and sleep duration (path c/total association), the associations between social-cognitive determinants and sleep hygiene practices (path a), the associations between sleep hygiene practices and sleep duration (path b), while controlling for the specific social-cognitive determinant (path c’) and finally, the indirect (paths a b) and direct (path c’) associations between social-cognitive determinants and sleep duration via sleep hygiene practices. Mediation occurred when a b was significant for which 5,000 bootstrapping iterations were requested. If mediation occurred, then proportional mediated associations were calculated by dividing the indirect association (path ab) by the total association (path c). Analyses were carried out using Stata version 17.0. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05. ## RESULTS

### Characteristics of the study population and scores on social-cognitive determinants

A total of 878 adolescents (mean age 13.3 years) were included, of which 485 (55.2%) were girls. Most adolescents perceived themselves as being solely Dutch (84.3%) and were in senior general secondary education (35.0%) or pre-university education (37.2%).

| Demographics                                                               | Value                     |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| Age, years, mean (SD)                                                    | 13.3 (0.71)               |
| Gender (girls), %                                                        | 55.2                      |
| Perceived cultural group, %                                              |                           |
| - Dutch                                                                  | 84.3                      |
| - Western                                                                | 5.6                       |
| - Creole                                                                 | 1.8                       |
| - Turkish or Moroccan                                                    | 4.8                       |
| - Other                                                                  | 3.1                       |
| Educational level, %                                                     |                           |
| - Pre-vocational secondary education                                     | 27.8                      |
| - Senior general secondary education                                     | 35.0                      |
| - Pre-university education                                               | 37.2                      |
| Sleep duration weekdays                                                   |                           |
| Sleep duration, min, mean (SD)                                          | 519 (50)                  |
| Insufficient sleep durationa , %                                         |                           |
| - 11–13-year-olds                                                        | 62.4                      |
| - 14–16-year-olds                                                        | 28.7                      |
| Sleep Hygiene (ASHS [range 1–5]), mean (SD)                             |                           |
| - Total ASHS                                                             | 3.93 (0.38)               |
| - Subscale behavioural arousal                                           | 3.10 (0.88)               |
| - Subscale cognitive/emotional arousal                                    | 3.47 (0.75)               |

Abbreviations: ASHS, Adolescent Sleep Hygiene Scale; SD, standard deviation.
aRecommendation for 11–13-year-olds: 9 h (9–11 h); recommendation for 14–16-year-olds: 8 h (8–10 h).

### Mediation analysis

#### Associations between social-cognitive determinants and sleep duration (c-coefficient)

As shown in Table 3, attitude, subjective norm from parents, perceived behavioural control, and intention towards sufficient sleep duration, towards not using media before bedtime, and towards doing relaxing activities before bedtime were all positively associated with sleep duration in the single variable models (all p < 0.01). No significant associations were found with respect to subjective norms from peers towards sufficient sleep duration and not using media prior to bedtime. In the multivariable models, attitude, perceived behavioural control and intention towards sufficient sleep duration were still positively associated with sleep duration (all p < 0.001). Positive associations with sleep duration were also found for subjective norms from parents and peers towards not using media before bedtime (p < 0.05) and subjective norms from parents towards doing relaxing activities before bedtime (p < 0.01).

#### Associations between social-cognitive determinants and sleep hygiene (a-coefficient)

In the single variable models, positive associations with sleep hygiene (collective sleep hygiene practices and behavioural arousal)

| Mean scores of social-cognitive determinants towards sufficient sleep duration, no media usage, and relaxing activities | Sufficient sleep duration | No media usage | Relaxing activities |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|----------------|---------------------|
| Attitude [range 1–5]                                                                                                  | 874                       | 3.83 (0.83)    | 873                | 2.96 (0.97)        | 873                | 2.79 (1.25)        |
| Subjective norm parents (normative belief motivation to comply) [range 1–25]                                        | 870                       | 11.81 (5.34)   | 868                | 9.43 (5.00)       | 868                | 7.75 (4.97)        |
| Subjective norm peers (normative belief motivation to comply) [range 1–25]                                          | 844                       | 6.69 (4.08)    | 865                | 9.23 (5.31)       | -                  | -                   |
| Perceived behavioural control [range 1–5]                                                                               | 869                       | 3.26 (1.00)    | 864                | 3.41 (1.00)       | 864                | 3.28 (1.19)        |
| Intention [range 1–5]                                                                                                  | 862                       | 3.88 (0.95)    | 863                | 3.30 (1.07)       | 863                | 3.10 (1.33)        |

Abbreviation: SD, standard deviation. T A B L E 3 Single- and multivariable mediation analyses for the association between social-cognitive determinants and mean sleep duration (in minutes), with sleep hygiene as a potential mediator (N = 878)

| Social-cognitive determinants regarding: | Associations between social-cognitive determinants and sleep duration | Direct associations with collective sleep hygiene practices | Associations between collective sleep hygiene practices and sleep duration | Mediated associations | % Mediation |
|------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|-------------|
|                                          | sufficient sleep duration c (95% CI)                              | a (95% CI)                                                 | b (95% CI)                                                 | ab (95% CI)         | c’ (95% CI) |
| Attitude                                 | Single variable model 17.02*** (12.91 to 21.13)                  | 0.11*** (0.08 to 0.14)                                     | 36.55*** (26.90 to 46.21)                                   | 3.99***             | 13.02*** (8.76 to 17.28) 24 (2.50 to 5.70) |
|                                          | Multivariable model 8.38*** (3.74 to 13.02)                      | 0.02 (–0.01 to 0.06)                                       | 27.75*** (18.13 to 37.36)                                   | 0.61 (–0.38 to 1.71) | 7.76** (3.05 to 12.46) No mediation |
| Subjective norms parents                 | Single variable model 1.64*** (1.06 to 2.23)                      | 0.01*** (0.01 to 0.02)                                     | 40.85*** (31.61 to 50.09)                                   | 0.50***             | 1.14*** (0.59 to 1.70) 30 (0.29 to 0.73) |
|                                          | Multivariable model 0.40 (–0.26 to 1.05)                         | 0.00 (–0.00 to 0.01)                                       | 27.75*** (18.13 to 37.36)                                   | 0.08 (–0.06 to 0.31) | (–0.28 to 0.80) No mediation |
| Subjective norms peers                  | Single variable model 0.07 (–0.86 to 0.72)                       | 0.00 (–0.01 to 0.00)                                       | 43.73*** (34.57 to 52.88)                                   | 0.22                | 0.14 (0.63 to 0.92) No mediation |
|                                          | Multivariable model 0.16 (–0.66 to 0.98)                         | 0.00 (–0.01 to 0.00)                                       | 27.75*** (18.13 to 37.36)                                   | 0.10                | 0.26 (0.51 to 1.03) No mediation |
| Perceived behavioural control            | Single variable model 13.93*** (10.42 to 17.44)                  | 0.14*** (0.11 to 0.16)                                     | 34.71*** (25.38 to 44.05)                                   | 4.76***             | 9.16*** (5.57 to 12.74) 34 (3.29 to 6.37) |
|                                          | Multivariable model 9.15*** (5.56 to 12.74)                      | 0.10*** (0.08 to 0.13)                                     | 27.75*** (18.13 to 37.36)                                   | 2.90***             | 6.24** (2.53 to 9.95) 32 (1.75 to 4.23) |
| Intention                                | Single variable model 15.73*** (12.31 to 19.15)                  | 0.13*** (0.10 to 0.15)                                     | 34.18*** (24.49 to 43.86)                                   | 4.39***             | 11.33*** (7.77 to 14.89) 28 (2.96 to 5.98) |
|                                          | Multivariable model 8.05*** (3.97 to 12.13)                      | 0.07*** (0.04 to 0.11)                                     | 27.75*** (18.13 to 37.36)                                   | 2.05***             | 6.00** (1.99 to 10.00) 26 (1.03 to 3.27) | T A B L E 3 (Continued)

| Social-cognitive determinants regarding: no media usage | Sleep duration (95% CI) | Behavioural arousal (95% CI) | Mediated associations (95% CI) | c’ (95% CI) | % Mediation |
|-------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|--------------|-------------|
| Attitude                                             |                         |                               |                               |              |             |
| Single variable model                                | 9.52*** (6.02 to 13.02) | 0.28*** (0.21 to 0.34)       | 18.85*** (15.12 to 22.58)     | 5.23*** (3.69 to 6.93) | 55          |
| Multivariable model                                  | 2.91 (1.78 to 7.60)     | 0.08* (0.00 to 0.16)         | 17.71*** (13.66 to 21.75)     | 1.41* (0.06 to 2.87) | 49          |
| Subjective norms parents                             |                         |                               |                               |              |             |
| Single variable model                                | 1.68*** (1.02 to 2.34)  | 0.04*** (0.02 to 0.05)       | 19.06*** (15.50 to 22.61)     | 0.69*** (0.42 to 0.99) | 41          |
| Multivariable model                                  | 0.86* (0.04 to 1.68)    | 0.01 (–0.01 to 0.02)         | 17.71*** (13.66 to 21.75)     | 0.12 (–0.12 to 0.38) | No mediation |
| Subjective norms peers                               |                         |                               |                               |              |             |
| Single variable model                                | 0.94** (0.30 to 1.57)   | 0.03*** (0.02 to 0.04)       | 19.81*** (16.21 to 23.41)     | 0.55*** (0.29 to 0.82) | 58          |
| Multivariable model                                  | 0.77* (0.16 to 1.38)    | 0.02** (0.01 to 0.03)        | 17.71*** (13.66 to 21.75)     | 0.35** (0.14 to 0.58) | 46          |
| Perceived behavioural control                         |                         |                               |                               |              |             |
| Single variable model                                | 9.58*** (6.19 to 12.97) | 0.36*** (0.31 to 0.42)       | 19.00*** (15.24 to 22.76)     | 6.91*** (5.25 to 8.71) | 72          |
| Multivariable model                                  | 4.30 (0.08 to 8.68)     | 0.26*** (0.19 to 0.32)       | 17.71*** (13.66 to 21.75)     | 4.51*** (3.02 to 6.19) | >100%       |
| Intention                                            |                         |                               |                               |              |             |
| Single variable model                                | 9.65*** (6.65 to 12.64) | 0.29*** (0.24 to 0.35)       | 18.45*** (14.68 to 22.22)     | 5.41*** (3.97 to 6.98) | 56          |
| Multivariable model                                  | 3.61 (1.08 to 8.29)     | 0.08* (0.00 to 0.16)         | 17.71*** (13.66 to 21.75)     | 1.42 (0.01 to 2.93) | No mediation |
| Association between social-cognitive determinants and cognitive/emotional arousal |                         |                               |                               |              |             |
| Sleep duration (95% CI)                              |                         |                               |                               |              |             |
| Attitude                                            |                         |                               |                               |              |             |
| Single variable model                                | 4.50** (1.64 to 7.36)   | -0.09*** (0.13 to –0.05)     | 11.65*** (6.70 to 16.61)      | 1.04** (1.76 to 0.47) | 23          | T A B L E 3 (Continued)

Association between social-cognitive determinants and sleep duration, adjusting for cognitive/emotional arousal and sleep duration associations

| Social-cognitive determinants regarding: | no mediation (95% CI) | c (95% CI) | a (95% CI) | b (95% CI) | ab (95% CI) | c’ (95% CI) | % Mediation |
|------------------------------------------|-----------------------|------------|------------|------------|--------------|--------------|-------------|
| Multivariable model                      | 1.29 (2.60 to 5.18)   | -0.07* (0.13 to 0.01) | 11.58*** (6.72 to 16.45) | 0.80* | 2.08 (1.97 to 6.13) | 61           |
| Subjective norms parents                 | 1.49*** (0.87 to 2.12) | 0.01 (0.02 to 0.00) | 10.66*** (5.87 to 15.46) | 0.07 | 1.56*** (0.94 to 2.18) | No mediation  |
| Multivariable model                      | 1.23** (0.51 to 1.95) | 0.01 (0.01 to 0.02) | 11.58*** (6.72 to 16.45) | 0.06 | 1.17** (0.45 to 1.89) | No mediation  |
| Perceived behavioural control             | 4.06** (1.42 to 6.70) | 0.06** (0.10 to 0.01) | 10.98*** (6.09 to 15.87) | 0.64* | 4.70*** (2.05 to 7.34) | 16           |
| Multivariable model                      | 1.98 (1.43 to 5.39)   | 0.01 (0.05 to 0.06) | 11.58*** (6.72 to 16.45) | 0.06 | 1.92 (1.49 to 5.33) | No mediation  |
| Intention                                | 4.18** (1.65 to 6.71) | 0.08*** (0.12 to 0.04) | 11.50*** (6.59 to 16.41) | 0.89** | 5.07*** (2.52 to 7.61) | 21           |
| Multivariable model                      | 0.25 (3.91 to 4.41)   | 0.04 (0.10 to 0.13) | 11.58*** (6.72 to 16.45) | 0.51 | 0.75 (3.36 to 4.86) | No mediation  |

Note: Statistical significance: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
Single variable model: social-cognitive determinants assessed without other social-cognitive determinants. Adjusted for age, gender, perceived cultural group and educational level.
Multivariable model: correlation between social-cognitive determinants included in the model. Adjusted for age, gender, perceived cultural group, educational level, and all social-cognitive determinants.
a Potential mediator: mean total Adolescent Sleep Hygiene Scale (ASHS) score.
b Potential mediator: ASHS-subscale behavioural arousal.
c Potential mediator: ASHS-subscale cognitive/emotional arousal. were found for attitude, subjective norms from parents, perceived behavioural control, and intention towards both sufficient sleep duration and not using media prior to bedtime (all p < 0.001). A positive association with behavioural arousal was also found for subjective norms from peers regarding not using media prior to bedtime (a = 0.03, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.02–0.04). A higher attitude, perceived behavioural control, and intention towards engaging in relaxing activities were associated with lower levels of cognitive/emotional arousal (p < 0.01). In the multivariable model, positive associations with collective sleep hygiene practices and behavioural arousal were found for perceived behavioural control and intention regarding sufficient sleep duration (p < 0.05). A positive association with behavioural arousal was also found for both attitude and subjective norm from peers (p < 0.05). Attitude was associated with lower levels of cognitive/emotional arousal (p < 0.05).

## Associations between sleep hygiene and sleep duration (b-coefficients)

Collective sleep hygiene practices, behavioural arousal and cognitive/emotional arousal were found to be strongly significant and positively associated with sleep duration (p < 0.001) in the single variable models. These significant and positive associations were also present in the multivariable models for all dimensions of sleep hygiene practices (p < 0.001). (ab = 6.91, 95% CI 5.25–8.71), and intention (ab = 5.41, 95% CI 3.97–6.98) towards not using media prior to bedtime and sleep duration. The proportions of the associations that could be explained by sleep hygiene regarding behavioural arousal amounted to 55%, 41%, 58%, 72%, and 56% for attitude, subjective norms from parents, subjective norms from peers, perceived behavioural control and intention, respectively. In the multivariable model, mediation by behavioural arousal was found for the associations between attitude (ab = 1.41, 95% CI 0.06–2.87), subjective norms from peers (ab = 0.35, 95% CI 0.14–1.58) and perceived behavioural control (ab = 4.51, 95% CI 3.02–6.19). The proportions of the associations that could be explained by behavioural arousal in this model amounted to 49%, 46% and >100% for attitude, subjective norms from peers and perceived behavioural control, respectively. Cognitive/emotional arousal also mediated the associations of attitude (ab = 1.04, 95% CI 1.76 to 0.47), perceived behavioural control (ab = 0.64, 95% CI 1.26 to 0.15), and intention (ab = 0.89, 95% CI 1.54 to 0.31) towards engaging in relaxing activities prior to bedtime and sleep duration in the single variable model. The proportions of the associations that could be explained by sleep hygiene regarding cognitive and emotional factors amounted to 23%, 16% and 21% for attitude, perceived behavioural control and intention, respectively. In the multivariable model, cognitive/emotional arousal only mediated the association with attitude towards engaging in relaxing activities and sleep duration (ab = 0.80, 95% CI 1.67 to 0.10) in which the proportion of the association that could be explained by cognitive/emotional arousal amounted to 61%.

## Mediating effect of sleep hygiene with respect to the associations between social-cognitive determinants and sleep duration (ab-coefficients)

In the single variable models collective sleep hygiene practices mediated the associations with sleep duration and attitude (ab = 3.99, 95% CI 2.50–5.70), subjective norms from parents (ab = 0.50, 95% CI 0.29–0.73), perceived behavioural control (ab = 4.76, 95% CI 3.29–6.37), and intention (ab = 4.39, 95% CI 2.96–5.98) towards sufficient sleep duration. The proportions of the associations that could be explained by collective sleep hygiene practices amounted to 24%, 30%, 34% and 28% for attitude, subjective norms from parents, perceived behavioural control, and intention, respectively. In the multivariable models, collective sleep hygiene practices mediated the associations with sleep duration and perceived behavioural control (ab = 2.90, 95% CI 1.75–4.23) and intention (ab = 2.05, 95% CI 1.03–3.27) with the proportions of the associations that could be explained by collective sleep hygiene practices being 32% and 26%, respectively. Furthermore, in the single variable model mediation by behavioural arousal was found for the associations between attitude (ab = 5.23, 95% CI 3.69–6.93), subjective norms from parents (ab = 0.69, 95% CI 0.42–0.99), subjective norms from peers (ab = 0.55, 95% CI 0.29–0.82), perceived behavioural control

## DISCUSSION

This study explored the associations between social-cognitive determinants regarding sufficient sleep duration, as well as specific components of sleep hygiene and the sleep duration of Dutch adolescents. Furthermore, we examined whether these associations were mediated by collective and specific components of sleep hygiene practices. The results showed that a more positive attitude, higher subjective norms from parents, higher perceived behavioural control, and higher intention regarding components of sleep hygiene (i.e., sufficient sleep duration, not using media prior to bedtime, engaging in relaxing activities prior to bedtime) were significantly associated with longer sleep duration. All these associations were mediated by sleep hygiene practices. When the other social-cognitive determinants were taken into account (i.e., multivariable model) some of the significant associations and mediation disappeared. Still, behavioural arousal prior to bedtime was the strongest mediator, although both collective sleep hygiene practices and cognitive/emotional arousal also explained parts of the associations. Adolescents with more positive attitudes, higher subjective norms from parents, higher perceived behavioural control, and higher intention towards sleeping sufficiently displayed longer sleep duration than their counterparts. These positive findings are broadly in line with those found in previous studies. One study found that adolescents with more positive attitudes had a greater intention to sleep more
although the association with sleep duration was not established. More studies have been conducted amongst college students, of which one showed that students with positive attitudes slept longer, while another found that only perceived behavioural control was predictive of longer sleep duration. Within the present study, adolescents with high subjective norms from their parents slept longer, albeit the association was small and no longer significant when the other social-cognitive determinants were taken into account. This is in accordance with the finding that subjective norms have not yet been identified as an important determinant of the outcomes of sleep health, and instead have only been found to be predictive of sleep hygiene intentions and better sleep hygiene practices amongst high school students. The present study found that the subjective norms of parents towards sufficient sleep duration were relatively low (i.e., 11.80, range 1–25), which is in contradistinction to the finding of an earlier study that found the opposite to be the case. Most adolescents indicated that their parents wanted them to get sufficient sleep every night (normative belief); however, the adolescents did not perceive their parents’ preferences regarding sleep duration as being important (motivation to comply). This result may be emblematic of adolescents’ increasing independence and autonomy during this particular life stage. Consequently, adolescence is an interesting period for explaining behaviour, insofar as the influence of social-cognitive determinants increases, while, simultaneously, the role of parents diminishes.
Sleep hygiene practices partly mediated the associations between social-cognitive determinants related to sufficient sleep duration and sleep duration. These associations can be explained, in part, by adolescents’ sleep hygiene practices (mediation ranging from 24% to 34%). However, when the other social-cognitive determinants were added to the model, sleep hygiene practices only mediated the associations between perceived behavioural control and intention and sleep duration. Given that sleep hygiene practices did not fully mediate all associations, other factors might also be of importance. For example, physical activity, a positive family environment and parent-set bedtimes have previously been identified as protective factors for adolescent sleep health, and, as such, might explain aspects of the associations.
All social-cognitive determinants related to not using media prior to bedtime were found to be associated with longer sleep duration, but stronger associations were found in particular for attitude, perceived behavioural control and intention. This indicates that social-cognitive determinants regarding not using media prior to bedtime may also affect sleep duration, albeit some to a lesser extent than others (i.e., subjective norms from parents and subjective norms from peers). However, when taking all social-cognitive determinants into account, subjective norms from parents and peers were associated with longer sleep duration, although minimal, whereas the other social-cognitive determinants were no longer significant. An explanation for these results could be that the social environment (i.e., subjective norms from parents and peers) may be more important compared to individual determinants regarding media use prior to bedtime. For example because they might be accompanied by parents’ rules about media use before bedtime. Similar to the role of parents, the role of peers regarding not using media was still relatively small in that it was only associated with slightly longer sleep duration. This is somewhat surprising given that social interaction is one of the main reasons cited by adolescents when asked why they engage with (social) media. Although most of the adolescents indicated that their peers used media prior to bedtime (normative belief), they did not perceive their peers’ behaviour as affecting their own behaviour (motivation to comply), and, as such, it had only a minimal impact on their sleep duration. Although this is in line with a previous study on adolescents’ perceived ability to resist peer pressure regarding bedtime, it might be the case that adolescents are either unaware of the influence of their peers or simply do not like to admit that their behaviour is influenced by their peers (i.e., fundamental attribution error).
Media usage prior to bedtime (i.e., behavioural arousal) partly explained the associations between the social-cognitive determinants towards not using media and sleep duration. In fact, it was the strongest mediator of the three mediation models (mediation ranging from 41% to 73%), also when all social-cognitive determinants were taken into account. This means that the extent of arousing activities prior to bedtime primarily explained the relation between social-cognitive determinants and sleep duration, which corroborates previous studies examining the relation between technology usage before bedtime and shorter sleep duration as well as other sleep-related outcomes. A recent study found that especially gaming and YouTube in the hour before bedtime were associated with shorter sleep duration. This could mean that associations and mediation by arousing activities might also differ per device and app use, which might be interesting to explore in future research.
Moreover, adolescents with higher attitudes, subjective norms from parents, perceived behavioural control and intention towards engaging in relaxing activities prior to bedtime also had higher sleep duration. The association between these determinants and sleep duration was less strong compared to the determinants related to sufficient sleep duration and not using media prior to bedtime. Also, when the other social-cognitive determinants were taken into account, only subjective norms from parents were still associated with longer sleep duration. Engaging in relaxing activities prior to bedtime might be perceived as less important by adolescents, which is also reflected in the relatively low mean scores on the corresponding social-cognitive determinants. However, a growing body of literature recognises the prevalence and impact of cognitive and emotional arousal on adolescent sleep, as well as how relaxing activities such as reading a book, listening to music or mindfulness might help to decrease cognitive and emotional arousal before bedtime. Although definitions of cognitive/emotional arousal differ slightly, previous studies have found that less cognitive/emotional arousal is associated with shorter SOL and within some groups also with longer sleep duration, which is also in line with our results (b-coefficients). The factors that may contribute to cognitive arousal are everyday hassles, stress from school and the fear of missing out (FOMO). Cognitive/emotional arousal also mediated the associations between attitude, perceived behavioural control, and intention towards engaging in relaxing activities with sleep duration (mediation ranging from 16% to 23%). However, after the other social-cognitive determinants were taken into account, cognitive/emotional arousal only mediated the association between attitude and sleep duration (61% mediation). The lack of mediation between the other social-cognitive determinants and sleep duration might be explained by the very small and non-significant associations between the social-cognitive determinants and cognitive/emotional arousal. Another explanation might be that the instrument in this study solely measured the presence of ruminating behaviours and negative emotions at bedtime, while measuring practices to overcome these arousing behaviours and emotions could also explain the associations.

## CONCLUSION

Adolescents with higher attitudes, subjective norms from parents, perceived behavioural control or intention towards sufficient sleep duration, towards not using media prior to bedtime and towards engaging in relaxing activities prior to bedtime exhibited higher sleep duration. Sleep hygiene practices (i.e., collective sleep hygiene practices, behavioural arousal, cognitive/emotional arousal) accounted for a substantial part of these associations. When taking the other social-cognitive determinants into account half of the associations and mediators were still significant, with behavioural arousal being the strongest mediator. These findings provide detailed insight into the social-cognitive determinants of adolescent sleep duration. Intervention development can be improved by targeting these determinants to enhance adolescent sleep health. Alongside targeting social-cognitive determinants at the individual level, interventions should also consider the environmental factors that influence adolescent sleep health.

## Strengths and limitations

This study has several strengths. First, this is one of the few studies that examined the influence of several social-cognitive determinants upon adolescent sleep duration. Moreover, studying the potential mediating effects of collective sleep hygiene practices, alongside sub-domains of sleep hygiene practices, provided more in-depth insights that are novel within the field. Furthermore, the study's sample size and use of validated measures for sleep hygiene practices and sleep duration, not to mention the valid formulation of items measuring social-cognitive determinants, adds to the value of our findings. However, the study is also not without its limitations. The first limitation concerns the fact that the associations were only assessed regarding weeknights, although assessing the differences between the role of social-cognitive determinants between weeknights and weekend nights would also be interesting. However, for the same reason that social-cognitive determinants might differ in relation to weekend nights, it was expected that analysing weekend night sleep duration may have resulted in distorted results. A second limitation is that we REFERENCES
Ajzen, I. (1985). From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior (pp. 11–39). Springer.
Armitage, C. J., & Conner, M. (2001). Efficacy of the theory of planned behaviour: A meta-analytic review. British Journal of Social Psychology, 40(4), 471–499.
Bartel, K., Williamson, P., van Maanen, A., Cassoff, J., Meijer, A. M., Oort, F., Knäuper, B., Gruber, R., & Gradisar, M. (2016). Protective and risk factors associated with adolescent sleep: Findings from Australia, Canada, and The Netherlands. Sleep Medicine, 26, 97–103.
Bartel, K. A., Gradisar, M., & Williamson, P. (2015). Protective and risk factors for adolescent sleep: A meta-analytic review. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 21, 72–85.
Berkowitz, L. (1984). Advances in experimental social psychology. Academic Press.
Billows, M., Gradisar, M., Dohnt, H., Johnston, A., McCappin, S., & Hudson, J. (2009). Family disorganization, sleep hygiene, and adolescent sleep disturbance. Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology, 38(5), 745–752.
Cain, N., & Gradisar, M. (2010). Electronic media use and sleep in school-aged children and adolescents: A review. Sleep Medicine, 11(8), 735–742.
Carney, C. E., Buysse, D. J., Ancoli-Israel, S., Edinger, J. D., Krystal, A. D., Lichstein, K. L., & Morin, C. M. (2012). The consensus sleep diary: Standardizing prospective sleep self-monitoring. Sleep, 35(2), 287–302.
Dahlgren, G., & Whitehead, M. (2006). European strategies for tackling social inequities in health: Levelling up part 2. WHO Regional office for Europe Copenhagen.
Dewald, J. F., Meijer, A. M., Oort, F. J., Kerkhof, G. A., & Bögels, S. M. (2010). The influence of sleep quality, sleep duration and sleepiness on school performance in children and adolescents: A meta-analytic review. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 14(3), 179–189.
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (2011). Predicting and changing behavior: The reasoned action approach. Psychology press.
Gariepy, G., Danna, S., Gobin¸a, I., Rasmussen, M., de Matos, M. G., Tynjälä, J., Janssen, I., Kalman, M., Villeruˇsa, A., & Husarova, D. (2020). How are adolescents sleeping? Adolescent sleep patterns and sociodemographic differences in 24 European and north American countries. Journal of Adolescent Health, 66(6), S81–S88.
Gradisar, M., Gardner, G., & Dohnt, H. (2011). Recent worldwide sleep patterns and problems during adolescence: A review and meta-analysis of age, region, and sleep. Sleep Medicine, 12(2), 110–118.
Gruber, R., Somerville, G., Paquin, S., & Boursier, J. (2017). Determinants of sleep behavior in adolescents: A pilot study. Sleep Health, 3(3), 157–162.
Hale, L., & Guan, S. (2015). Screen time and sleep among school-aged children and adolescents: A systematic literature review. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 21, 50–58.
Hale, L., Li, X., Hartstein, L. E., & LeBourgeois, M. K. (2019). Media use and sleep in teenagers: What do we know? Current Sleep Medicine Reports, 5(3), 128–134.
Hirshkowitz, M., Whiton, K., Albert, S. M., Alessi, C., Bruni, O., DonCarlos, L., Hazen, N., Herman, J., Hillard, P. J. A., & Katz, E. S. (2015). National Sleep Foundation's updated sleep duration recommendations. Sleep Health, 1(4), 233–243.
Inhulsen, M. B. M., Busch, V., & van Stralen, M. M. (2022). Effect evaluation of a school-based intervention promoting sleep in adolescents: A cluster-randomized controlled trial. Journal of School Health, 92(6), 550-560.
Jakobsson, M., Josefsson, K., & Högberg, K. (2020). Reasons for sleeping difficulties as perceived by adolescents: A content analysis. Scandinavian Journal of Caring Sciences, 34(2), 464–473.
Jose, P. E. (2013). Doing statistical mediation and moderation. Guilford Press.
Knowlden, A. P., Sharma, M., & Bernard, A. L. (2012). A theory of planned behavior research model for predicting the sleep intentions and behaviors of undergraduate college students. The Journal of Primary Prevention, 33(1), 19–31.
Kocevska, D., Lysen, T. S., Dotinga, A., Koopman-Verhoeff, M. E., Luijk, M. P., Antypa, N., Biermasz, N. R., Blokstra, A., Brug, J., & Burk, W. J. (2021). Sleep characteristics across the lifespan in 1.1 million people from The Netherlands, United Kingdom and United States: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Nature Human Behaviour, 5(1), 113–122.
Kor, K., & Mullan, B. A. (2011). Sleep hygiene behaviours: An application of the theory of planned behaviour and the investigation of perceived autonomy support, past behaviour and response inhibition. Psychology & Health, 26(9), 1208–1224.
Lao, H. C., Tao, V. Y., & Wu, A. M. (2016). Theory of planned behaviour and healthy sleep of college students. Australian Journal of Psychology, 68(1), 20–28.
LeBourgeois, M. K., Giannotti, F., Cortesi, F., Wolfson, A. R., & Harsh, J. (2005). The relationship between reported sleep quality and sleep hygiene in Italian and American adolescents. Pediatrics, 115(Supplement 1), 257–265.
Lund, L., Sølvhøj, I. N., Danielsen, D., & Andersen, S. (2021). Electronic media use and sleep in children and adolescents in western countries: A systematic review. BMC Public Health, 21(1), 1–14.
MacKinnon, D. P. (2008). Introduction to statistical mediation analysis. Routledge.
Maskevich, S., Cassanet, A., Allen, N. B., Trinder, J., & Bei, B. (2020). Sleep and stress in adolescents: The roles of pre-sleep arousal and coping during school and vacation. Sleep Medicine, 66, 130–138.
McEachan, R. R. C., Conner, M., Taylor, N. J., & Lawton, R. J. (2011). Prospective prediction of health-related behaviours with the theory of planned behaviour: A meta-analysis. Health Psychology Review, 5(2), 97–144.
Mead, M. P., & Irish, L. A. (2020). Application of health behaviour theory to sleep health improvement. Journal of Sleep Research, 29(5), e12950.
Owens, J., & A. S. W. Group. (2014). Insufficient sleep in adolescents and young adults: An update on causes and consequences. Pediatrics, 134(3), e921–e932.
Peach, H. D., Gaultney, J. F., & Ruggiero, A. R. (2018). Direct and indirect associations of sleep knowledge and attitudes with objective and subjective sleep duration and quality via sleep hygiene. The Journal of Primary Prevention, 39(6), 555–570.
Pillion, M., Gradisar, M., Bartel, K., Whittall, H., & Kahn, M. (2022). What's “app”-ning to adolescent sleep? Links between device, app use, and sleep outcomes. Sleep Medicine, 100, 174-182.
Preacher, K. J., & Selig, J. P. (2012). Advantages of Monte Carlo confidence intervals for indirect effects. Communication Methods and Measures, 6(2), 77–98.
Scott, H., & Woods, H. C. (2018). Fear of missing out and sleep: Cognitive behavioural factors in adolescents' nighttime social media use. Journal of Adolescence, 68, 61–65.
Stockdale, L. A., & Coyne, S. M. (2020). Bored and online: Reasons for using social media, problematic social networking site use, and behavioral outcomes across the transition from adolescence to emerging adulthood. Journal of Adolescence, 79, 173–183.
Storfer-Isser, A., Lebourgeois, M. K., Harsh, J., Tompsett, C. J., & Redline, S. (2013). Psychometric properties of the adolescent Sleep Hygiene Scale. Journal of Sleep Research, 22(6), 707–716.
Strong, C., Lin, C. Y., Jalilolghadr, S., Updegraff, J. A., Broström, A., & Pakpour, A. H. (2018). Sleep hygiene behaviours in Iranian adolescents: An application of the theory of planned behavior. Journal of Sleep Research, 27(1), 23–31
Tarokh, L., Saletin, J. M., & Carskadon, M. A. (2016). Sleep in adolescence: Physiology, cognition and mental health. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 70, 182

## SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional supporting information can be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of this article

## How to cite this article
Inhulsen, M. B. M. R., Busch, V., Kalk, R., & van Stralen, M. M. (2023). Adolescent sleep duration: associations with social-cognitive determinants and the mediating role of sleep hygiene practices. Journal of Sleep Research, 32(3), e13774 