# Intense and problematic social media use and sleep difficulties of adolescents in 40 countries

## Abstract

**Introduction:** Social media has become a ubiquitous part of everyday life; however, evidence suggests patterns of social media use can affect sleep health in children and adolescents. This study aimed to examine the associations of intense and problematic social media use (SMU) with sleep‐onset difficulties in adolescence.

**Methods:** We analysed data from 212,613 adolescents aged 11‐15 years (51.1% girls) from 40 European and North American countries that participated in the 2017/2018 Health Behaviour in School‐aged Children survey. Intense SMU assessed how often respondents had online contact through social media, and problematic SMU was assessed by symptoms of addiction to social media. Sleep‐onset difficulties were assessed using a self‐reported item. Multilevel mixed‐effects logistic regression was used to obtain the estimates.

**Results:** Sleep‐onset difficulties were more common among girls than boys (27.1% vs 20.8%). Intense SMU was significantly associated with sleep‐onset difficulties in boys in 17 countries and in girls in 25 countries, while problematic SMU was significantly associated in most of the participating countries. Overall, exposure to problematic SMU alone was highly associated with sleep‐onset difficulties both in girls (OR 2.20, 2.04–2.38) and boys (OR 1.88, 1.73–2.04), while the association estimates for intense SMU were smaller and comparable across gender (Girls: OR 1.27, 1.23–1.31; Boys: OR 1.22, 1.18–1.27). Sensitivity analyses supported the above findings.

**Conclusions:** Intense and/or problematic SMU were associated with sleep‐onset difficulties across gender with associations being higher for problematic compared to intense SMU. Prospective research with objective measures is needed to understand the causal mechanisms underlying these relationships.

## K E Y W O R D S
sleep problems, digital screen use, children, multi‐country, HBSC

## 1 INTRODUCTION
Social media use (SMU) has increased exponentially with over 4.8 billion people using social media around the world in 2023, equating to 59.9% of the total global population. Social media has revolutionized the way we communicate and interact with others, particularly for adolescents who are increasingly spending more time online and less time engaging with friends, family, and peers in real life. In the digital age, young people are now able to instantly connect with peers and the world, opening new pathways for socialization, entertainment, and information‐sharing. About 90% of adolescents use at least one social media platform, with an average daily use of three social media platforms, spending nearly 3 h daily engaging with these platforms. The use of social media provides several benefits, such as communication and connection, accessing new information, learning opportunities, participating in community activities, and receiving and offering emotional support and healthcare services. For example, social media platforms provide individuals with positive ways to connect with people from diverse backgrounds and cultures, allowing for the sharing of ideas and experiences, and developing meaningful connections with alternative cultures. This can help to promote tolerance and understanding, as individuals are exposed to different perspectives and cultures. However, as the use of social media is now ubiquitous, its potential risks require investigation. Available evidence suggests that SMU is adversely associated with mental health and wellbeing outcomes, including depression and anxiety, particularly in children and adolescents. However, there are differences in the ways young people use social media; girls spend more time on social media than boys, and the association between SMU and rates of mental illness are higher among girls relative to boys.

Consistent with high social media uses by adolescents, there has been an increasing trend toward poorer sleep, including shorter sleep duration and sleep‐onset difficulties. Indeed, the use of electronic devices and social media has been linked to sleep difficulties among adolescents in some studies, including cross‐nationally. However, other studies have found no significant association between media use and sleep disturbances, nor between social media and sleep quality. The complexity arises from the fact that SMU has not been consistently measured. Some studies look at time spent on social media, while others look at number of platforms uses, and others look at problematic SMU. This lack of consistency may explain why the literature is mixed. It is therefore necessary for studies to clearly define how SMU is being measured, and ideally, to measure multiple constructs (e.g., the intensity of use, type of use) at the same time.

The literature suggests that there are a range of reasons that might explain the negative associations between intense and problematic SMU and sleep difficulties. Intense or frequent users may be at higher risk of delayed bedtimes, shorter sleep duration, and poor sleep quality due to exposure to bright screens before bed, and engagement with stimulating content, leading to pre‐bedtime arousal. To elaborate, smartphones emit blue light that can disrupt melatonin secretion, which hinders the body's ability to initiate sleep. Problematic users might be susceptible to sleep disturbances through the emotional and cognitive arousal elicited by social media content which may interfere with the natural process of falling asleep. Additionally, the constant availability and notifications of social media may lead to a sense of FOMO (fear of missing out), resulting in increased night‐time awakenings to check social media, and possible difficulties falling back asleep. As such, problematic users may displace sleep time and quality with SMU. Moreover, evidence suggests that girls are more susceptible to engage in problematic SMU than boys, although this has been seldom investigated.

Although emerging studies are exploring the associations between intense and/or problematic SMU and sleep health among adolescents, findings are mixed and important gaps in knowledge remain, two of which we address in this study. First, intense and problematic SMU are inter‐related, yet distinct concepts, but studies typically have not examined their associations with sleep difficulties together in one model. Therefore, it remains unclear whether intense and problematic SMU contribute equally to the onset of sleep difficulties in adolescents. Second, most available evidence related to the association between intense and problematic SMU and sleep involve nonrepresentative, small sample and/or single country data. Hence, it is not clear whether and to what extent the associations with sleep difficulties apply reliably in large samples and cross‐nationally. An exception to these small studies is one recent cross‐national study that utilised data from 86,542 adolescents in 18 countries and revealed that intense and problematic SMU were associated with less sleep overall. However, this study focused on links between SMU and sleep patterns in general, rather than sleep difficulties (such as sleep‐onset difficulties). To extend our understanding of the extent to which intense and/or problematic SMU is associated with sleep difficulties during adolescence, it is important to extend this work to larger samples. Thus, the objective of this study was to examine the relationship between intense and problematic SMU and the sleep‐onset difficulties in adolescents across 40 countries. Based on prior work, we hypothesised that both intense and problematic SMU are associated with the sleep‐onset difficulties, particularly in girls.

## METHODS
Data were from the 2017‐2018 Health Behaviour in School‐aged Children (HBSC) survey, which is a cross‐sectional health and wellbeing survey of adolescents across European and North American countries. Using a stratified random cluster sampling, HBSC collects school‐based data every 4 years from a nationally representative sample of 11‐, 13‐, and 15‐year‐olds in the participating countries. Participants provided self‐report data by anonymously completing a questionnaire that includes a range of items on health indicators and related behaviours. Survey administrators in each country received ethics approval from an appropriate regulatory body, and informed consent was obtained from participants and a parent or guardian. Of the 44 countries that took part in the survey, 4 countries did not have information on the variables of interest and hence, the analytical sample was based on 40 countries. Secondary analyses for this manuscript were approved by The University of Queensland Human Ethics Research Committee (2021/HE000671).

## Sleep‐onset difficulties
Sleep‐onset difficulties was assessed by a single item: “In the last 6 months, how often have you had difficulties in getting to sleep?” This question was answered on a five‐point scale: about every day, more than once a week, about every week, about every month, and rarely or never with respective proportions being 13.2%, 10.9%, 11.1%, 15.6% and 49.2%. Answers were dichotomised as having sleep‐onset difficulties “about every day or more than once a week” (1) or not (0).

## Social media uses
Intense SMU was assessed using a 4‐item scale from the European Union Kids Online Survey. The scale showed good validity and reliability across countries. Respondents were asked how often they have online contact through social media with the following people: close friends, friends from a larger friend group, friends that they met through the Internet, and other people (e.g., parents, siblings, classmates, teachers). Responses ranged from 1 (never/almost never) to 5 (almost all the time throughout the day) with five respective proportions being 65.7%, 18.0%, 9.3%, 4.4%, and 2.6%. Respondents who answered almost all the time throughout the day on at least one item were classified as intensive users (1), and the remainder were classified as non‐intensive users (0).

Problematic SMU was assessed using the 9‐item Social Media Disorder Scale. Respondents were asked to indicate whether they, in the past year, regularly could not think of anything else but social media (preoccupation), regularly felt dissatisfied because they wanted to spend more time on social media (tolerance), often felt bad when they could not use social media (withdrawal), failed to spend less time on social media (persistence), regularly neglected other activities because of social media (displacement), regularly had arguments with others because of their SMU (problem), regularly lied to parents or friends about their time spent on social media (deception), often used social media to escape from negative feelings (escape), and had serious conflicts with parents or siblings because of their SMU (conflict). Responses were yes (1) and no (0). Respondents who answered positively to at least six items were classified as problematic users (1), and the remainder as non‐problematic users (0). The dichotomised problematic SMU had good psychometric properties with α = .89. Dichotomisation of the SMU scores was used to deal with the nonlinear nature of the relationships with sleep‐onset difficulties, in addition to facilitate better interpretation.

## Control variables
The analyses were controlled for a set of covariates that have been shown to be associated with the use of electronic devices in adolescents. Participants reported height and weight, which were used to generate body mass index (BMI) and then converted into BMI z‐scores using the WHO Child Growth Standards. Participants also reported the number of days in the past week that they participated in moderate‐to‐vigorous physical activities for at least 60 min. Family‐level socioeconomic status was measured using the Family Affluence Scale, which is a composite score based on household assets including number of vehicles and computers, bedroom sharing, and number of family holidays in the past year. The children's answers to the six items were summed up (0–13) to be used in the analysis. The summed score can be interpreted as 0‐5 for low affluence, 6‐10 for middle affluence and 11‐13 for high affluence. Given the evidence that SMU patterns are different for boys and girls and associations between electronic media use and sleep are dependent on age, both gender and age were also controlled for in statistical modelling.

## Statistical analyses
Descriptive statistics of the variables of interests were computed. Proportions of adolescents reporting sleep‐onset difficulties were computed for intense and problematic SMU. Missing values ranged from 0.6% (age) to 22.6% (BMI) (Table 1). To minimise biases due to the missing data, we implemented multiple imputations by chained equations (MICE). We chose 23 imputations based on the rule that the number should be at least as large as the percentage of missing data. The imputed descriptive statistic values closely matched the observed values. A correlation matrix with all variables of interest is presented in Appendix A. |Characteristics|Boys|Girls|
|---|---|---|
|Number of countries|40|40|
|Total participants|104,008|108,605|
|Average age (SD)a|13.51 (1.63)|13.52 (1.63)|
|Average Family Affluence Scale (SD)b|7.96¥ (2.77)|7.81¥ (2.79)|
|Average BMI (SD)c|19.68 (3.71)|19.39 (3.51)|
|Prevalence of sufficient physical activity (%) d|22.26|14.57|
|Prevalence of excessive social media use (%)e|30.82|37.59|
|Prevalence of problematic social media use (%)f|6.66|7.98|
|Prevalence of sleep‐onset difficulties (%)|20.76|27.06|

Note: SD: Standard deviation. Median FAS score = 8.0. aPercentage of missing values. age: 0.67%. cbFAS: 9.02%.BMI: 22.62%. edPA: 2.21%. Excessive SMU: 7.93%. f Problematic SMU: 16.81%.

Figure 1 Percentage of adolescents with sleep‐onset difficulties and intense and problematic social media use (SMU) by gender, HBSC 2017/2018.

Multilevel mixed‐effects logistic regression was used to obtain estimates of the associations for each country, the effects of intense and problematic SMU in the same model. The same modelling approach was implemented in the overall sample. All models were adjusted for age, gender, BMI z‐scores, family affluence, and physical activity. The gender‐stratified analyses were supported by significant interactions between gender and intense and problematic SMU. Finally, we conducted sensitivity analyses using continuous intense and problematic SMU scores to see whether such a change would affect the association estimates. The analyses were conducted using Stata V17SE and the estimates are presented in the form of odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI).

3 | RESULTS Descriptive statistics of the analytical sample are presented in Table 1 (n = 212,613). Mean age of participants was 13.52 (SD 1.64) years and 50.9% were girls. Over a quarter (27.1%) of adolescent girls reported sleep‐onset difficulties, while sleep‐onset difficulties was reported by 20.8% of adolescent boys. Intense SMU was more prevalent among girls than boys (37.6% vs 30.8%), while problematic SMU was slightly higher in girls than boys (8.0% vs 6.7%). As shown in Figure 1, nearly 23% of boys with intense SMU reported sleep‐onset difficulties, while the percentage was 31% in girls. About 31% of the boys with problematic SMU reported sleep‐onset difficulties compared to 44% of their female counterparts. Of the adolescents with sleep‐onset difficulties, 65.7% of boys and 58% of girls reported intense SMU, while 89.9% of boys and 86.9% of girls reported problematic SMU. Estimates of associations between intense and problematic SMU and sleep‐onset difficulties for each of the participating countries are presented in Figures 2–3. Association estimates in many countries varied across gender. Intense SMU was significantly associated with sleep‐onset difficulties in boys in 17 countries and in girls in 25 countries. For example, boys reporting intense SMU in Hungary had 85% higher odds of reporting sleep‐onset difficulties (OR 1.85, 95% CI 1.36–2.51).

### Intense SMU and sleep difficulties

#### Boys

| Country | Odds Ratio (OR) | 95% Confidence Interval (CI) |
|---------|------------------|------------------------------|
| Hungary | 1.85             | 1.36–2.51                    |

#### Girls

| Country | Odds Ratio (OR) | 95% Confidence Interval (CI) |
|---------|------------------|------------------------------|
|         |                  |                              |

F I G U R E 2 Country level estimates of adjusted association of intense social media use (SMU) with sleep‐onset difficulties in adolescents from 40 countries by gender, HBSC 2017/2018. # Problematic SMU and sleep difficulties

## Boys

|   |   |   |   |
|---|---|---|---|
| 6 | 29 | g | 8 |
| 2 |   |   |   |

## Girls

|   |   |   |   |
|---|---|---|---|
| 6 | 8 | 2 |   |
| 3 |   |   |   |
| 8 | 2 |   |   |

F I G U R E 3 Country level estimates of adjusted association of problematic social media use (SMU) with sleep‐onset difficulties in adolescents from 40 countries by gender, HBSC 2017/2018. | Association estimates of intense and problematic social media use (SMU) with sleep‐onset difficulties in adolescents from 40 countries, HBSC 2017/2018. | Boys | Girls |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | aOR (95% CI) | aOR (95% CI) |
| Excessive SMU |  |  |
| No | 1.00 | 1.00 |
| Yes | 1.21 (1.17, 1.25) | 1.26 (1.22, 1.30) |
| Problematic SMU |  |  |
| No | 1.00 | 1.00 |
| Yes | 1.78 (1.67, 1.89) | 2.10 (1.99, 2.20) |

Note: adjusted for age, sex, BMI z‐scores, family affluence, and physical activity. aOR: adjusted odds ratio; CI: Confidence interval. reference category.

while girls having intense SMU in Latvia had 91% higher odds of reporting sleep‐onset difficulties (OR 1.91, 95% CI 1.56–2.34) (Figure 2). Most countries studied showed a positive association between problematic SMU and sleep‐onset difficulties (30 countries in boys and 33 countries in girls) with the highest estimates in boys in The Netherlands (OR 3.12, 95% CI 2.03–5.10) and in girls in Sweden (OR 3.26, 95% CI 2.16–4.92) (Figure 3). Adjusted association estimates of intense and problematic SMU and sleep‐onset difficulties in the overall sample are presented in Table 2. Multivariable modelling showed that adolescents who had problematic SMU had 78% higher odds in boys (OR 1.78; 95% CI 1.67–1.89) and 110% higher odds in girls (OR 2.10; 95% CI 1.99–2.20) of reporting sleep‐onset difficulties. The association estimates for intense SMU were smaller and comparable across gender (OR 1.21, 95% CI 1.17–1.25 in boys and OR 1.26, 95% CI 1.22–1.30 in girls). Finally, sensitivity analyses showed that sleep onset‐difficulty was significantly associated with both SMU (continuous) scores. Problematic SMU scores were highly associated with sleep‐onset difficulties across gender (OR 1.15, 95% CI 1.14–1.16 for boys; OR 1.19, 95% CI 1.18–1.20 for girls). Some evidence for an association was found between sleep‐onset difficulties and intense SMU scores for both boys and girls (OR 1.04, 95% CI 1.03–1.06 and OR 1.05, 95% CI 1.04–1.07, respectively).

4 DISCUSSION
The aim of this study was to examine the relationship between intense and problematic SMU and sleep‐onset difficulties in adolescents across multiple countries. Our findings revealed that both intense and problematic SMU are associated with higher odds of reporting sleep‐onset difficulties, with problematic SMU demonstrating a more negative association with sleep‐onset difficulties relative to intense SMU, regardless of gender. These associations were observed in multiple countries, highlighting the global nature of the issue. The overall pattern of SMU and sleep‐onset difficulties in our study is consistent with previous research, with girls spending more time on social media than boys, and reporting poorer sleep quality. We also found that girls reporting both intense and problematic SMU had greater odds of reporting sleep‐onset difficulties than boys. This finding suggests that girls may be more vulnerable to the association between social media exposure and sleep difficulties than boys and highlights the importance of considering gender as a relevant factor when designing interventions to influence SMU and sleep quality in adolescents. Moreover, this supports continued work to explore the sleep implications of how adolescent boys and girls spend their time on social media (i.e., are they engaging in more problematic vs less problematic usage?), with evidence showing gender differences in social media platform preferences and motivations. This work to more broadly understand how adolescents spend their time on social media, may better inform interventions designed to modify SMU patterns across gender. Despite evidence of a positive association between both intense and problematic SMU and sleep‐onset difficulties, reporting problematic SMU alone had a stronger association with higher odds of reporting sleep‐onset difficulties than reporting intense SMU alone. This makes sense from a clinical perspective given that problematic SMU was assessed using a measure based on clinical criteria used to diagnose Internet Gaming Disorder in the Diagnostic and Statistics Manual. For example, this measure assesses deception and conflict caused by time spent on SMU, both of which are characteristics of disorders of addiction. Conversely, intense SMU was characterised by frequent interaction with others using SMU, which is not inherently unhelpful. Our finding showing the relatively greater association between problematic SMU and sleep‐onset difficulties suggests that focusing on problematic SMU is likely to be a more effective and meaningful target for intervention when aiming to improve sleep quality in adolescents. Nonetheless, frequent use of social media is a likely precursor of problematic use of social media and remains an important agenda for future longitudinal research. Some research suggests that parental rules around internet and smartphone use before sleep might prevent negative consequences of social media on sleep quality, but only among less engaged social media users. Once adolescents are highly engaged in social media, it is possible that they develop a dependency, and are more likely to engage in problematic usage. Identifying appropriate strategies to improve sleep quality for those already engaged in high levels of SMU and dependence should be addressed in future research.

Current findings may have practical implications for broader health outcomes, such as mental health. Evidence from prospective studies suggest that sleep‐onset difficulties typically precede the onset of depression in adolescents. Therefore, interventions aimed at improving sleep‐onset time by targeting problematic SMU particularly at bedtime, has the potential to reduce risk of depression. Future research would benefit from utilising longitudinal data to address the temporal sequencing of the relationships between problematic SMU and sleep difficulties in adolescents. In this way, interventions which target problematic SMU may indirectly contribute to the prevention or reduction of mental health issues in adolescents.

This study contributes to the existing literature by using a large, representative sample of adolescents from multiple countries. Previous studies have often relied on nonrepresentative small samples or single‐country data, which limits generalizability of findings. By including nationally representative data from 40 countries (n = 212,613), this study provides robust evidence regarding the association between SMU and sleep‐onset difficulties in adolescents from around the world, demonstrating large and meaningful effect sizes with clinical implications. Several study limitations should be acknowledged. The data were self‐reported, which are subject to recall and response biases. Moreover, sleep‐onset difficulties were assessed by a single item which does not capture other important dimensions of sleep disturbance. Similarly, SMU was assessed generally and did not consider the contexts of social media engagement that may be more strongly associated with poorer sleep outcomes, such as bedtime usage. Objective measures and comprehensive assessments are necessary to gain a more nuanced understanding of the relationship between SMU and sleep difficulties in future research. The study design was cross‐sectional, limiting the ability to establish directionality. Our analysis identified substantial gender differences in the association estimates in some countries, which deserve further research to account for and provide insight into the reasons for these differences across countries. The family affluence scale may not represent socioeconomic status of the individuals who participated in the survey across countries, which deserves more attention research. Future research should employ prospective designs to further explore the causal mechanisms underlying these relationships.

In conclusion, this study provides valuable evidence supporting the link between SMU and sleep‐onset difficulties in adolescents. This appears to be driven by problematic SMU and should be a target for intervention when designing approaches to reduce sleep‐onset difficulties among adolescents. These approaches should consider how adolescents are engaging with social media (i.e., problematic vs less problematic usage) and acknowledge important gender differences. Finally, prospective research with objective measures is warranted to understand the complex interplay between SMU and sleep quality and work towards promoting the well‐being and healthy development of adolescents in the digital age. KHAN ET AL.

| Author(s) | Year | Title | Journal | Volume | Pages |
|-----------|------|-------|---------|--------|-------|
| Alimoradi, Z., Lin, C.‐Y., Broström, A., Bülow, P. H., Bajalan, Z., Griffiths, M. D., Ohayon, M. M., & Pakpour, A. H. | 2019 | Internet addiction and sleep problems: A systematic review and meta‐analysis | Sleep medicine reviews | 47 | 51–61 |
| Barry, C. T., Sidoti, C. L., Briggs, S. M., Reiter, S. R., & Lindsey, R. A. | 2017 | Adolescent social media use and mental health from adolescent and parent perspectives | Journal of Adolescence | 61 | 1–11 |
| Boer, M., van den Eijnden, R. J. J. M., Boniel‐Nissim, M., Wong, S. L., Inchley, J. C., Badura, P., Craig, W. M., Gobina, I., Kleszczewska, D., Klanšček, H. J., & Stevens, G. W. J. M. | 2020 | Adolescents’ intense and problematic social media use and their well‐being in 29 countries | Journal of Adolescent Health | 66(6s) | S89–S99 |
| Boer, M., van den Eijnden, R. J. J. M., Finkenauer, C., Boniel‐Nissim, M., Marino, C., Inchley, J., Cosma, A., Paakkari, L., & Stevens, G. W. J. M. | 2022 | Cross‐national validation of the social media disorder scale: findings from adolescents from 44 countries | Addiction | 117(3) | 784–795 |
| Boer, M., Stevens, G. W. J. M., Finkenauer, C., Koning, I. M., & van den Eijnden, R. J. J. M. | 2022 | Validation of the social media disorder scale in adolescents: findings from a large‐scale nationally representative sample | Assessment | 29(8) | 1658–1675 |
| Boer, M., Stevens, G. W. J. M., Finkenauer, C., de Looze, M. E., & van den Eijnden, R. J. J. M. | 2021 | Social media use intensity, social media use problems, and mental health among adolescents: investigating directionality and mediating processes | Computers in Human Behavior | 116 | 106645 |
| Boniel‐Nissim, M., Tynjälä, J., Gobiņa, I., Furstova, J., van den Eijnden, R. J. J. M., Marino, C., Klanšček, H. J., Klavina‐Makrecka, S., Villeruša, A., Lahti, H., Vieno, A., Wong, S. L., Villberg, J., Inchley, J., & Gariépy, G. | 2023 | Adolescent use of social media and associations with sleep patterns across 18 european and north American countries | Sleep Health | 9(3) | 314–321 |
| Bozzola, E., Spina, G., Agostiniani, R., Barni, S., Russo, R., Scarpato, E., Di Mauro, A., Di Stefano, A. V., Caruso, C., Corsello, G., & Staiano, A. | 2022 | The use of social media in children and adolescents: scoping review on the potential risks | International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health | 19(16) | 9960 |
| Bozzola, E., Spina, G., Ruggiero, M., Vecchio, D., Caruso, C., Bozzola, M., Staiano, A. M., Agostiniani, R., Del Vecchio, A., Banderali, G., Peroni, D., Chiara, A., Memo, L., Turra, R., Corsello, G., & Villani, A. | 2019 | Media use during adolescence: the recommendations of the Italian pediatric society | Italian Journal of Pediatrics | 45(1) | 149 |
| Cain, N., & Gradisar, M. | 2010 | Electronic media use and sleep in school‐aged children and adolescents: A review | Sleep Medicine | 11(8) | 735–742 |
| Cajochen, C., Frey, S., Anders, D., Späti, J., Bues, M., Pross, A., Mager, R., Wirz‐Justice, A., & Stefani, O. | 2011 | Evening exposure to a light‐emitting diodes (LED)‐backlit computer screen affects circadian physiology and cognitive performance | Journal of Applied Physiology | 110(5) | 1432–1438 |
| Currie, C., Molcho, M., Boyce, W., Holstein, B., Torsheim, T., & Richter, M. | 2008 | Researching health inequalities in adolescents: the development of the health behaviour in School‐Aged children (HBSC) family affluence scale | Social science & medicine (1982) | 66(6) | 1429–1436 |
| Das‐Friebel, A., Lenneis, A., Realo, A., Sanborn, A., Tang, N. K. Y., Wolke, D., von Mühlenen, A., & Lemola, S. | 2020 | Bedtime social media use, sleep, and affective wellbeing in young adults: an experience sampling study | Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry | 61(10) | 1138–1149 |
| Datareportal. | 2023 | Global social media statistics |  |  |  |
| van den Eijnden, R. J. J. M., Geurts, S. M., Ter Bogt, T. F. M., van der Rijst, V. G., & Koning, I. M. | 2021 | Social media use and adolescents’ sleep: A longitudinal study on the protective role of parental rules regarding Internet use before sleep | International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health | 18(3) | 1346 |
| Galland, B. C., Short, M. A., Terrill, P., Rigney, G., Haszard, J. J., Coussens, S., Foster‐Owens, M., & Biggs, S. N. | 2018 | Establishing normal values for pediatric nighttime sleep measured by actigraphy: a systematic review and meta‐analysis | Sleep | 41(4) | zsy017 |
| Gariepy, G., Danna, S., Gobiņa, I., Rasmussen, M., Gaspar de Matos, M., Tynjälä, J., Janssen, I., Kalman, M., Villeruša, A., Husarova, D., Brooks, F., Elgar, F. J., Klavina‐Makrecka, S., Šmigelskas, K., Gaspar, T., & Schnohr, C. | 2020 | How are adolescents sleeping? adolescent sleep patterns and sociodemographic differences in 24 european and north American countries | Journal of Adolescent Health | 66(6s) | S81–S88 |
| Ghekiere, A., Van Cauwenberg, J., Vandendriessche, A., Inchley, J., Gaspar de Matos, M., Borraccino, A., Gobina, I., Tynjälä, J., Deforche, B., & De Clercq, B. | 2019 | Trends in sleeping difficulties among european adolescents: are these associated with physical inactivity and excessive screen time? | International journal of public health | 64(4) | 487–498 |
| Hisler, G. C., Hasler, B. P., Franzen, P. L., Clark, D. B., & Twenge, J. M. | 2020 | Screen media use and sleep disturbance symptom severity in children | Sleep Health | 6(6) | 731–742 |
| Kolhar, M., Kazi, R. N. A., & Alameen, A. | 2021 | Effect of social media use on learning, social interactions, and sleep duration among university students | Saudi Journal of Biological Sciences | 28(4) | 2216–2222 |
| Lovato, N., & Gradisar, M. | 2014 | A meta‐analysis and model of the relationship between sleep and depression in adolescents: recommendations for future research and clinical practice | Sleep medicine reviews | 18(6) | 521–529 |
| Lovato, N., Short, M., Micic, G., Hiller, R., & Gradisar, M. | 2017 | An investigation of the longitudinal relationship between sleep and depressed mood in developing teens | Nature and Science of Sleep | 9 | 3–10 |
| Lund, L., Sølvhøj, I. N., Danielsen, D., & Andersen, S. | 2021 | Electronic media use and sleep in children and adolescents in Western countries: a systematic review | BMC Public Health | 21(1) | 1598 |
| Mascheroni, G., & Ólafsson, K. | 2014 | Access and use | Net Child. Go Mob. Risks Oppor. |  |  |
| Mérelle, S. Y., Kleiboer, A. M., Schotanus, M., Cluitmans, T. L., Waardenburg, C. M., Kramer, D., & van Rooij, T. | 2017 | Which health‐related problems are associated with problematic video‐gaming or social media use in adolescents? A large‐scale cross‐sectional public health study | Clinical Neuropsychiatry | 14(1) | 11–19 |
| Nagata, J. M., Singh, G., Yang, J. H., Smith, N., Kiss, O., Ganson, K. T., Testa, A., Jackson, D. B., & Baker, F. C. | 2023 | Bedtime screen use behaviors and sleep outcomes: findings from the adolescent brain cognitive development (ABCD) study | Sleep Health | 9(4) | 497–502 |
| Oden, A., & Porter, L. | 2023 | The kids are online: teen social media use, civic engagement, and affective polarization | Social Media + Society | 9(3) | 20563051231186364 | JOURNAL OF ADOLESCENCE

| Author(s) | Year | Title | Journal | Volume | Pages |
|-----------|------|-------|---------|--------|-------|
| Odgers, C. L., & Jensen, M. R. | 2020 | Annual research review: adolescent mental health in the digital age: facts, fears, and future directions | Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry | 61(3) | 336–348 |
| Roberts, C., Freeman, J., Samdal, O., Schnohr, C. W., de Looze, M. E., Nic Gabhainn, S., Iannotti, R., & Rasmussen, M. | 2009 | The health behaviour in school‐aged children (HBSC) study: methodological developments and current tensions | International journal of public health | 54(Suppl. 2) | 140–150 |
| Sawyer, R., & Chen, G. M. | 2012 | The impact of social media on intercultural adaptation | Intercultural Communication Studies | 21(2) | 151–169 |
| Scott, H., Biello, S. M., & Woods, H. C. | 2019a | Identifying drivers for bedtime social media use despite sleep costs: the adolescent perspective | Sleep Health | 5(6) | 539–545 |
| Scott, H., Biello, S. M., & Woods, H. C. | 2019b | Social media use and adolescent sleep patterns: cross‐sectional findings from the UK millennium cohort study | BMJ Open | 9(9) | e031161 |
| Shalani, B., Azadfallah, P., & Farahani, H. | 2021 | Correlates of screen time in children and adolescents: a systematic review study | Journal of Modern Rehabilitation | 15(4) | 187–208 |
| Shychuk, M., Joseph, N., & Thompson, L. A. | 2022 | Social media use in children and adolescents | JAMA Pediatrics | 176(7) | 730 |
| Sohn, D. | 2014 | Coping with information in social media: the effects of network structure and knowledge on perception of information value | Computers in Human Behavior | 32 | 145–151 |
| Thomas, G., Bennie, J. A., De Cocker, K., & Biddle, S. J. H. | 2021 | Exploring contemporary screen time in Australian adolescents: A qualitative study | Health Promotion Journal of Australia | 32(Suppl. 2) | 238–247 |
| Thomas, G., Bennie, J. A., De Cocker, K., Ireland, M. J., & Biddle, S. J. H. | 2020 | Screen‐based behaviors in Australian adolescents: longitudinal trends from a 4‐year follow‐up study | Preventive Medicine | 141 | 106258 |
| Twenge, J. M., & Martin, G. N. | 2020 | Gender differences in associations between digital media use and psychological well‐being: evidence from three large datasets | Journal of Adolescence | 79 | 91–102 |
| Twenge, J. M., Spitzberg, B. H., & Campbell, W. K. | 2019 | Less in‐person social interaction with peers among U.S. adolescents in the 21st century and links to loneliness | Journal of Social and Personal Relationships | 36(6) | 1892–1913 |
| Varghese, N. E., Santoro, E., Lugo, A., Madrid‐Valero, J. J., Ghislandi, S., Torbica, A., & Gallus, S. | 2021 | The role of technology and social media use in sleep‐onset difficulties among Italian adolescents: cross‐sectional study | Journal of Medical Internet Research | 23(1) | e20319 |
| White, I. R., Royston, P., & Wood, A. M. | 2011 | Multiple imputation using chained equations: issues and guidance for practice | Statistics in Medicine | 30(4) | 377–399 |

SUPPORTING INFORMATION
Additional supporting information can be found online in the Supporting Information section at the end of this article.

How to cite this article: Khan, A., Thomas, G., Karatela, S., Morawska, A., & Werner‐Seidler, A. (2024). Intense and problematic social media use and sleep difficulties of adolescents in 40 countries. Journal of Adolescence, 96, 1116–1125 