## Abstract

**Objective:** Commonly held beliefs about sleep unsupported by scientific evidence (ie, myths) among adolescents and their parents/caregivers may adversely influence sleep-related attitudes and behaviors among adolescents. Thus, identifying such myths with the goal of developing effective evidence-based counter-messages has the potential to improve sleep health in adolescents.

**Method:** We identified myths with a panel of adolescent sleep health experts (n = 12) using the Delphi method in three sequential steps: (1) focus groups; (2) online discussion; and (3) closed-ended questionnaires with which the experts rated myths on: (1) falseness and (2) public health significance using 5-point Likert scales ranging from 1 (not at all false/important for public health) to 5 (extremely false/important for public health). Next, we explored the prevalence of the Results: Ten myths about adolescent sleep were identified by the experts using the Delphi method. The most prevalent myths were the beliefs that (1) “Going to bed and waking up late on the weekends is no big deal for adolescents, as long as they get enough sleep during that time,” reported by 74% of parents/caregivers; (2) “If school starts later, adolescents will stay up that much later,” reported by 69% of parents/caregivers; and (3) “Melatonin supplements are safe for adolescents because they are natural,” reported by 66% of parents/caregivers.

Conclusion: Parents/caregivers have the potential to serve as sleep health advocates for their adolescent and support their adolescent’s sleep health behaviors. Our study found that many parents/caregivers endorse myths about adolescent sleep that may hinder their ability to support their adolescent’s sleep health. Future research may explore methods for promoting evidence-based beliefs about adolescent sleep among parents/caregivers.

Keywords
Sleep; Adolescent health; Sleep health; Sleep myths

Introduction

Sleep health is essential for optimal development and well-being among adolescents. Numerous studies have documented short and long-term consequences of insufficient or poor quality sleep among adolescents, including mental health concerns, obesity, lower academic performance, substance/alcohol use, and motor vehicle accidents. Despite the consequences of insufficient or poor quality sleep among adolescents, there is an epidemic of deficient sleep (ie, insufficient sleep time and circadian misalignment) among members of this age group that presents concerns for their health, well-being, development, and safety. Sleep and circadian timing changes dramatically beginning in early adolescence, presenting a steep physiological barrier to sleep, which is exacerbated by other factors, some of which are modifiable and within the control of adolescents and their parents/caregivers, including evening screen time; social networking; caffeine/stimulant intake; and academic, work and extracurricular time demands. According to the integrative model of behavioral prediction, strong predictors of health behavior are beliefs such as knowledge and attitudes toward the behavior. Previous research found that certain beliefs adolescents hold about sleep, such as perceptions of their ability to manage time efficiently in order to get sufficient sleep, were associated with intentions to obtain sufficient sleep. However, other behavioral beliefs may hinder adolescents in their ability to obtain sufficient sleep, such as myths, defined as beliefs about a behavior that are held, yet are counter to scientific fact. Research among adults has shown that those who endorse sleep myths also demonstrate poor sleep health behaviors, including inconsistent bedtimes, poor sleep hygiene, and insufficient sleep on non-work nights. As the family environment plays an important role in adolescent health and well-being, when it comes to adolescent sleep health, beliefs among parents/caregivers are an important factor in understanding adolescent beliefs and behaviors. For instance, Peltz and Rogge found that dysfunctional beliefs about sleep among parents caregivers were associated with more parent/caregiver-child arguments over bedtimes and
lower sleep quality among adolescents. While research has examined common sleep myths
among adults and dysfunctional sleep beliefs among parents/caregivers, adolescent
sleep myths among parents/caregivers have not yet been explored. Exploring adolescent
sleep myths among parents/caregivers may inform future efforts to promote evidence-based
sleep beliefs among parents/caregivers and adolescents.

Myths about sleep may emerge from many sources, one of which could be word of
mouth. Research examining sources of family planning information found relying on word-
of-mouth advice was common, but was associated with beliefs that lacked an evidence-
base. Another possible source of myths about sleep is the Internet, social media, and
social networking websites. Many caregivers and adolescents report seeking sleep health
information from online outlets, some of which may not be informed by science and thus
propagate inaccurate and possibly false beliefs. Although social media has the potential to
disseminate evidence-based health messages, research suggests that may not always be the
case. A study examining the content of popular health videos on YouTube showed that the
most watched videos contained concerning levels of misinformation. There has been
heightened attention to the spread of such misinformation online amidst the COVID-19
pandemic.

To identify the most salient myths about adolescent sleep among parents/caregivers, this
study enlisted a group of expert adolescent sleep researchers and clinicians. With adolescent
sleep health experts, we reviewed and systematically rated adolescent sleep myths on the
following dimensions: (1) lack of empirical support (falseness) and (2) potential negative
public health impact. Then, in a demographically diverse sample of parents/caregivers
of adolescents in the United States, we explored the prevalence of each myth. Finally,
we report the counterevidence to refute each myth. The overarching goal is to identify
common adolescent sleep myths so as to inspire future public outreach and education
efforts to promote evidence-based beliefs about sleep health among parents/caregivers and
adolescents.

## Methods

To identify myths about adolescent sleep, we adhered to the Delphi method, which is a
systematic, iterative process for soliciting expert feedback. For the purposes of
this study, as in previous work exploring sleep myths in adults, we defined a myth as a
commonly held but false belief or common misconception that is either not supported by, or
conflicts directly with, scientific evidence. Then, we explored the prevalence of the myths
among parents/caregivers of adolescents in the United States.

### Expert panel

Consistent with previous research using the Delphi method, criteria for recruiting sleep
experts included (1) multiple publications in the areas of sleep and adolescence; (2)
extensive experience in working with adolescents in clinical and/or research settings; (3)
knowledge of the existing scientific evidence in adolescent sleep and (4) demonstrated Robbins et al.                                                                                                              Page 4

Author Manuscript                          interest in sleep health education for this population. Experts (N = 12 [blinded for peer review]) were invited to participate.

## Delphi method to identify myths
The Delphi method was administered in several steps. First, we performed a Google search using specific terms (sleep myth; adolescent or adolescence; teen or teenager) and created a list of all myths identified (n = 115). The websites that were returned from the search included news articles, blogs, and advocacy organizations (see screenshots of sample websites that resulted from the search for adolescent sleep myths in Supplemental Information A). The list of 115 myths included many similar statements. Two independent coders reviewed the list of myths, then thematically organized the myths into domains (eg, sleeping in on weekends or having trouble waking from sleep for school days) and consolidated the similar statements. The coders discussed their results before agreeing on a consolidated list of 35 potential myths.

Second, the first author conducted a focus group that solicited open-ended feedback from all experts to the 35 myth statements. At this stage, experts were also explicitly asked to propose additional myths about adolescent sleep. Experts were then asked to provide verbal feedback to each potential myth based on 2 criteria: (1) falseness, based on their knowledge of the strength of existing contradictory evidence to counter the myth statement; and (2) public health significance, based on the degree to which myths would be problematic to health among adolescents and their families if allowed to go unchallenged. The first author compiled 15 pages of notes from the expert feedback that were analyzed using the constant comparative method, which is a method for the analysis of qualitative data. At this step, if a majority (n > 6) of experts agreed that a statement was factually true (and therefore not a myth), the statement was dropped, resulting in a list of 16 potential myths.

Third, experts received the potential myths via email and were asked to propose edits to the myth statements and provide (1) “keep” or (2) “drop” ratings based on the falseness and public health significance criteria defined above. Myths that received a “drop” rating by a majority of experts were eliminated from the analysis. This stage identified overlapping statements or statements that were similar and that could either be combined/dropped. Therefore, at this stage, expert editorial changes and drop/keep ratings resulted in a smaller list of 12 potential myths. Fourth, experts rated the myths in a closed-ended survey on degree of falseness and public health significance. In the case of falseness, experts were asked to respond to the question “How false is each statement” on a scale from (1) “Not at all,” (3) “A moderate amount,” to (5) “A great deal.” In the case of public health significance, experts were asked the importance from a public health standpoint, that the myth be corrected on the same 5-point scale. Two criteria were used to retain potential myths at this step: (a) a mean expert rating above the scale mid-point on falseness (3) and (b) the presence of scientific literature to counter/confirm myth statement. Two myths not achieving this threshold were dropped. Establishing levels of evidence to counter the myths
We adhered to the GRADE framework for selecting evidence to counter the myths. This approach guided the selection of evidence in that it is a framework that articulates evidence selection criteria, such as quality, translation of the evidence into specific circumstances, and the certainty of risk of the results. If available, priority was given to meta-analyses and randomized controlled trials as evidence to counter the myths. We applied the GRADE approach in several steps. First, the lead author conducted a review of the literature in each myth domain, then reviewed and summarized the evidence by myth. Second, the experts reviewed the evidence and were asked to propose additional studies if necessary. Lastly, the experts approved the final selection of evidence to counter each myth. Experts were asked to consider the GRADE criteria of quality, translation, and certainty when critiquing the literature selected to counter the myths.

Determining the prevalence of the adolescent sleep myths among parents/caregivers
Once the myths were identified, we administered the myths via survey to AmeriSpeak, a probability-based panel managed by the National Opinion Research Center (NORC) at the University of Chicago. The myths survey assessed the extent to which a participant agreed with each myth on a 5-point Likert scale (1: strongly disagree, 2: somewhat disagree, 3: neutral, 4: somewhat agree, and 5: strongly agree). As our goal is to inform future educational campaigns, we argue that parents/caregivers who were either neutral (unsure) or in agreement with a myth are ideal candidates for future educational efforts to promote evidence-based beliefs. To this end, we dichotomized responses so that those who did not endorse a myth (ie, responded either “somewhat disagree” or “strongly disagree”) were assigned a value of 0 while those that were either unsure or endorsed myths (ie, responded either “neutral,” “somewhat agree,” or “strongly agree”) were assigned a value of 1.

Survey participants
Amerispeak is a panel of randomly selected households that are sampled using area probability and address-based sampling by US mail, telephone, and field interview. Amerispeak is designated to be representative of the US household population. Participants provide informed consent during enrollment. The stratification procedures employed by NORC ensure representativeness of the participants with respect to age, gender, race/ethnicity, and education. Participants in the Amerispeak panel are routinely contacted by NORC with opportunities to participate in research. Participants complete surveys in either English or Spanish. Eligible participants were adults (18 years of age and older), residing in a US household. Our myth questionnaire was one of the several surveys that were included in the April 2022 survey. To recruit participants for this given survey wave of the Amerispeak panel, NORC identified a random sample of 4757 Amerispeak panel members to receive the April 2022 survey. Among those contacted, 1010 responded and completed the April 2022 survey for a 21% completion rate. Of the April 2022 respondents (n = 1010), 200 participants reported that they were currently a parent or caregiver to an adolescent. Using branching logic, those who reported being a parent/caregiver to an adolescent (n = 200) received the myths questionnaire in the April 2022 survey. The sleep myths questions took approximately 10 minutes to answer. Statistical analysis

We computed interitem correlation coefficients (alpha) for the responses from experts to the falseness and public health significance for each myth. Then, we report the descriptive statistics summarizing the responses to the myth statements that either disagreed (“somewhat” or “strongly”) or agreed (“neutral,” “somewhat agree” or “strongly agree”) with each myth statement.

## Results

### Myths identified by experts

The panel of experts identified 10 myths about adolescent sleep and rated them on scales assessing falseness and public health significance of each myth. The expert ratings on falseness and public health significance for each myth are shown in Table 1. There was internal consistency in responses from experts to falseness of each myth (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.71) and public health significance of each myth (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.84). The myth that received the highest rating on ‘falseness’ from experts was “Falling asleep in class means an adolescent lacks motivation” (falseness: mean = 4.8, s.d. = 0.5; public health significance: mean: 4.3, s.d. = 0.8). The myth with the second highest rating on falseness from experts was “It’s better for an adolescent who has a test to stay up late studying than it is to get sleep” (falseness: mean = 4.5, s.d. = 0.7; public health significance: mean = 4.4, s.d. = 0.7). The myth with the third highest rating on falseness from experts was “If adolescents can’t get up for school, they are lazy” (falseness: mean = 4.4, s.d. = 0.7; public health significance: mean = 4.2, s.d. = 1.3).

### Prevalence of myths among parents/caregivers to adolescents

The 200 parents in our final sample were 50% male; 48% were age 30–44 years of age and 39% were 45–59 years of age; 50% were non-Hispanic White, 17% non-Hispanic Black, and 22% Hispanic. Demographic characteristics of the sample are displayed in Table 2.

The proportion of parents/caregivers that either agreed or disagreed with each myth is outlined in Figure 2. The most prevalent myth was the belief that “Going to bed and waking up late on the weekends is no big deal for adolescents, as long as they get enough sleep during that time,” reported by 74% of parents/caregivers. The second most prevalent myth was the belief that “If school starts later, adolescents will stay up that much later,” reported by 69% of parents/caregivers. The third most prevalent myth was “Melatonin supplements are safe for an adolescent because they are natural,” reported by 66% of parents/caregivers.

### Evidence to counter the myths

Myth 1: “Falling asleep in class means an adolescent lacks motivation.”—Although adolescents need 8–10 hours of nocturnal sleep for optimal health, performance, and development, nationally representative surveys, including the Youth Risk Behavior Survey and the National Sleep Foundation Teens and Sleep poll, show that nearly half of adolescents report obtaining insufficient sleep on school nights, placing them at risk for moderate to severe daytime sleepiness. In addition, research shows that age - or more specifically, pubertal development - is a contributing factor to sleepiness among adolescents. Specifically, Carskadon and colleagues measured sleep over several nights and pubertal development according to the Tanner criteria in children starting at age 10 over the following 6 or 7 years. These studies demonstrated that although laboratory-detected sleep duration remained unchanged, objectively recorded daytime sleepiness increased with pubertal development; 92% of participants before pubertal development remained awake during daytime assessments of sleepiness, while only 48% of participants at later stages of pubertal development remained awake during assessments of sleepiness. As such, insufficient sleep coupled with developmental changes likely underlies sleepiness among adolescents, rather than lack of motivation.

Myth 2: “It’s better for an adolescent who has a test to stay up late studying than it is to get sleep.” — Learning, memory, and cognitive functions are impaired by insufficient sleep duration and circadian misalignment. Adolescents exhibiting insufficient sleep are more likely to demonstrate poorer academic performance, and sleep-deprived “cramming” is disruptive to learning and memory. Additionally, next-day sleepiness after insufficient sleep may result in impaired cognitive function, such as reduced test-taking ability, and other performance detriments.

Myth 3: “If adolescents can’t get up for school, they are lazy.” — Due to normal changes in the homeostatic sleep drive (i.e., slower accumulation during wakefulness) and circadian phase preference (i.e., shift to “eveningness” chronotype), adolescents are prone to later sleep onset times compared to their pre-pubertal counterparts. Unfortunately, late bedtimes conflict with early school start times, placing adolescents in an untenable position in which sleep needs and biologically-based sleep/wake schedules are at odds with both social and environmental demands. Therefore, the false attribution of difficulty waking up on school mornings to vague constructs such as “laziness” is inaccurate and unfounded.

Myth 4: “An adolescent’s sleep schedule is largely out of their control.” — The biological changes in sleep during adolescence are not something adolescents can modify, nor can they alter the demands of the school schedule. Nevertheless, with appropriate education and assistance from parents, evidence shows that adolescents can modify their behavior in ways that at least partially offset these factors; often by capitalizing on environmental cues to these biological processes. Specifically, research has found that an intervention comprised of both cognitive behavioral therapy and blue light therapy resulted in a reduction in sleepiness and sleep onset latency, and an increase in sleep time among adolescents with delayed sleep phase disorder. In other research comparing school-based sleep education, parental involvement, blue light therapy, and control (class as usual) found each intervention approach was associated with an improvement as compared to control participants with respect to sleep knowledge, sleep latency, and sleep duration among adolescents, even those with delayed sleep timing. School-based sleep health education interventions can also be effective in assisting students in regulating their sleep and wake times. Therefore, with appropriate intervention, such as parental involvement and school-based sleep education, adolescents can demonstrate improvements in sleep health. Myth 5: “If school starts later, adolescents will just stay up that much later.”
—Numerous studies have demonstrated that delaying middle and high school start times results in significantly more total sleep, particularly extended morning sleep. These studies have also found that delayed school start times often have minimal impact on student bedtimes. Indeed, slightly later bedtimes have not been shown to off-set morning sleep gains. One study actually documented a shift to a significantly earlier average bedtime by 20 minutes after a delay in school start times.

Myth 6: “Energy drinks or other stimulants can counteract the negative effects from sleep deprivation for an adolescent.”
—According to evidence from the Monitoring the Future national survey, approximately 30% of 10th to 12th graders report regularly consuming energy drinks, often to counteract the effects of insufficient sleep. However, energy drink (and other caffeinated substances) consumption has been associated with adverse sleep outcomes, including insufficient and poor quality sleep and delayed sleep onset. Furthermore, use of caffeine and other stimulants to improve academic performance for example, has not been shown to be effective. Reliance on these temporarily alerting agents may even be dangerous, as subjective perceived impairment is lowered by caffeine consumption but objective impairment is not.

Myth 7: “Melatonin supplements are safe for adolescents because they are natural.”
—Melatonin is an endogenous hormone secreted in the brain that helps to regulate sleep and wake patterns, particularly in response to light/dark cues in the environment. Supplementation of melatonin, though now ubiquitous in the adolescent population, is controversial for a number of reasons. While short-term clinical trials and outcome studies of exogenous melatonin administration for insomnia have demonstrated efficacy and have not thus far reported serious adverse events, longer-term studies are currently lacking. In particular, concerns have been raised about the known effects of melatonin on pubertal development that have been shown in animal studies. In addition, a recent study found that available melatonin products vary widely in their actual melatonin content compared to label claims. Finally, melatonin is frequently being used in adolescent populations without medical evaluation or supervision and in the absence of behavioral interventions for insomnia; it is also increasingly marketed as an agent to “promote peaceful sleep” in otherwise healthy children and adolescents without research to back up that claim.

Myth 8: “Adolescents need much less sleep than school-aged children.”
—Since the initial experimental studies examining adolescent sleep needs multiple subsequent studies have demonstrated that adolescents on average require 8–10 hours of sleep for optimal health, safety and performance. While this is somewhat less than the recommended range for school-aged children (9–11 hours), that reduction is overshadowed by the decline in actual sleep obtained by many adolescents, resulting in adolescents not meeting recommended guidelines.

Myth 9: “Going to bed and waking up late on the weekends is no big deal for adolescents, as long as they get enough sleep during that time.”
—Attempts to address sleep deficits by delaying wake times and varying the sleep schedule on non-school Myth 10: “Getting too much sleep is bad for an adolescent.”—Although the guidelines recommend an upper limit on sleep duration, there are several caveats. First, the guidelines relate to consistent nightly sleep duration, not occasional nights of “recovery” sleep after periods of sleep deprivation. Because most adolescents do not even meet the lower end of the recommended range of 8–10 hours of sleep consistently across nights, it is quite rare for adolescents to routinely get more than 10 hours of sleep at night. Experimental research has confirmed that, after a few nights to recover from sleep debt, it is very rare for healthy adolescents to remain asleep beyond 9.5 to 10-hour time windows. Chronic sleep beyond 10 hours may be a marker for other well-known risk factors, such as obesity, that themselves affect long-term health. While sleeping beyond 10 hours on a regular basis might be associated with negative outcomes for certain adolescents, there is no evidence for concern for “too much sleep” in the general adolescent population. In contrast, there is considerable evidence that too little sleep - a highly common phenomenon - causes adverse effects.

Discussion

Sleep changes dramatically from middle school to adolescence, and while some disturbances are normal, sleep disruption can be confusing for and affect the entire family. During this critical developmental transition, myths about sleep may emerge and stem from many sources, ranging from friends and family to traditional or social media sources. Myths about sleep that are held among adolescents and their caregivers may undermine these individuals’ ability to obtain sleep health.

We identify 10 myths that adolescent sleep health experts rated as false (lacking an evidence base) and important to address to improve public health. The criteria for a myth in this study was an expert rating of “3” or higher on the 5-point falseness scale and presence of strong scientific evidence to counter the statement. Beyond the 10 selected myths, statements regarding early bedtimes among adolescents (see Supplement) lacked sufficient scientific evidence either for or against. These beliefs about adolescent sleep, while not reaching the level of a myth in the present study, may warrant further research.

We also document prevalence of these myths among parents/caregivers of adolescents in the general population of the United States. The most prevalent myth was the belief that “Going to bed and waking up late on the weekends is no big deal for adolescents, as long as they get enough sleep during that time,” which was reported by three quarters of parents/caregivers. Unfortunately, sleeping well past their usual wake up time on weekends may lead to circadian misalignment, further limiting young people in their ability to obtain healthy sleep. The second most prevalent myth was “If school starts later, adolescents will stay up that much later,” reported by approximately two thirds of parents/caregivers. contrary, research demonstrates that delaying school start times results in significantly more total sleep. The belief that adolescents will simply stay up later if school times change likely will hinder parents/caregivers from participating in the critical efforts to change school start times. Future research on changing school start times might want to address these beliefs among parents/caregivers. Finally, the third most prevalent myth was “Melatonin supplements are safe for an adolescent because they are natural,” which was also reported by approximately two-thirds of parents/caregivers. Recent evidence shows that the number of melatonin ingestions among pediatric populations (≤19 years of age) has increased 530% in the past decade. However, the long-term implications of melatonin supplement use among adolescents is unknown. In addition, research has demonstrated that the purity of melatonin available on the consumer market ranges widely compared to label claims. Outside of the Unites States, many countries ban over-the-counter sales of melatonin due to the inadequate data on safety. Our expert panel agreed that widespread use of melatonin supplements among young people based on myths about safety should be discouraged. Considering this, it is concerning that parents/caregivers in our study reported widely that melatonin was safe for their adolescent because it is natural.

Finally, we review the counterevidence to the myths identified in the present study. Although all 10 myths retained here had a high falseness rating from experts and sufficient refuting scientific evidence, some may have nuances worthy of additional research. For instance, it is unclear at what point the recuperative aspects of weekend “oversleep” becomes offset by the risks from circadian misalignment.

It is interesting to note that the myths about adolescent sleep that were rated most false by experts were not among the most commonly held beliefs by parents/caregivers. For instance, experts rated “Falling asleep in class means an adolescent lacks motivation” and “It’s better for an adolescent who has a test to stay up late studying than it is to get sleep” as the two most false myths, while the two most commonly endorsed myths among parents/caregivers were “Going to bed and waking up late on the weekends is no big deal for adolescents, as long as they get enough sleep during that time” and “If school starts later, adolescents will just stay up that much later.” On one hand, it is encouraging that parents/caregivers did not endorse the myths rated by experts as extremely false. On the other hand, this could suggest that our list of myths identified by the experts may not be comprehensive and that engaging parents in the myth generating phase may result in other myths.

The current study provides important information for stakeholders including adolescents, caregivers, healthcare providers and other adults who provide recommendations regarding sleep habits (eg, coaches, health educators) by identifying 10 myths that potentially undermine adolescent sleep health. The myths identified herein offer several opportunities for future research. First, qualitative methods may be beneficial in soliciting feedback to the myths identified in this study from adolescents and caregivers, consistent with previous research. Second, the future public health campaigns or community-based efforts may be undertaken to debunk these myths and promote factual, evidence-based beliefs about sleep. Such efforts may benefit from partnerships between academic, non-profit, and public policy stakeholders. Efforts to counter untrue beliefs and promote factual beliefs and practices will require contribution from various sources, ranging from community leaders to healthcare Limitations
The myths identified in this study are the result of the Delphi method, a structured framework for soliciting expert input. Our study examined sleep myths among a small sample of parents/caregivers. Future research may explore prevalence of sleep myths among a larger sample of parents/caregivers to enable examination of specific factors that might influence sleep beliefs. Future research may also explore sleep myths among adolescents themselves. It is a limitation that the majority of experts engaged in this project are from North America. Experts from other countries and cultures may have raised other myths pertaining to adolescent sleep that merit attention. Additional studies may utilize a similar approach (eg, Delphi procedure) to ascertain sleep myths among parents/caregivers and their adolescents in other countries. In this study, the standard for establishing a statement as a myth included either an expert rating of “falseness” and/or absence of scientific evidence to counter a myth. Accordingly, 2 myths were eliminated due to either low ratings on falseness from experts or due to lacking scientific evidence. The myths that were dropped from the analysis due to insufficient scientific evidence may be examined in future research. Furthermore, the sample recruited for the survey study was a subsample of a nationally representative panel; although the final sample was demographically diverse, findings may differ across demographic and cultural groups. Finally, it is a limitation that there is not direct, refuting scientific evidence for each myth. Instead, the authors drew upon the GRADE framework for selecting available scientific evidence to counter each myth.

Conclusions
Sleep is a critical component of adolescent development and wellbeing. Sleep changes significantly from middle school to adolescence, and changes can be challenging for the adolescent as well as their family. Caregivers and adolescents commonly turn to social media for guidance on topics such as sleep. Although well-intended, information on these platforms may not be factual or worse, may be sources of misinformation. We assembled a cadre of experts to develop a list of common adolescent sleep myths then explored the proportion of a sample of parents/caregivers that endorsed the myths in a nationally representative population of adults in the United States. Future research may aim to counter myths and promote evidence-based beliefs about adolescent sleep.

Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

Acknowledgments
The authors respectfully acknowledge the participation of Drs. Mary Carskadon, Jodi Mindell, Reut Gruber, Merrill Wise, and Hawley Montgomery-Downs in the Delphi method to identify and rate the adolescent sleep myths. We extend our sincere gratitude to our colleague, Dr. Wendy Troxel, for her feedback on the project along the way. Page 12

Funding
Dr. Robbins is supported by the NIH/NHLBI (K01HL150339). Dr. Beebe is supported by the NIH (R01HL147915, R01NS125326, R01HD093754) and DOD (W81XWH-19-NFRP-CTA). Dr. Hale is supported by NIH (R01HD73352, R21HD097941). Dr. Tapia is supported by NIH (R01HL152454, R21HD101003, R61HL151253). Dr. Byars is supported by the NIH (R01HL147915, R61HL151253). Dr. Grandner is supported by R01DA051321 and R01MD011600. The other authors received no external funding.

Disclosures
Dr. Robbins has served as a consultant to Denihan Hospitality Group, SleepCycle AB, Rituals Cosmetics BV, Deep Inc., and Wave Sleep Inc. Dr. Hale received an honorarium from the National Sleep Foundation for her role as Editor-in-Chief of Sleep Health (between 2015 and 2020). Dr. Grandner has received grants from Kemin Foods, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, and CereZ Technologies, and has received consulting funds from Fitbit, Natrol, Casper, Athleta, and Merck. For the remaining authors, none were declared. Sleep Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01. Sleep Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01. Sleep Health. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01. Step I:
Google searches identify potential sleep myth statements

Step 2:
Experts provide verbal feedback to sleep myth statements

Step 3:
Experts provide edits to sleep myth statements via email

Fig. 1.
Flowchart outlining the Delphi method of obtaining expert consensus for a list of adolescent sleep myths.

Step 4:
Experts rate myths on 5-point falseness significance scales and public health Responses from parents/caregivers regarding myths about adolescent sleep (n = 200)

| Myth                                                                 | Agree | Disagree |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|----------|
| Going to bed and waking up late on the weekends is no big deal for adolescents |       |          |
| If school starts later, adolescents will just stay up that much later |       |          |
| Melatonin supplements are safe for adolescents                        |       |          |
| Energy drinks are bad for an adolescent: the negative effects from sleep deprivation are largely out of their control |       |          |
| Adolescents need much less sleep than school-aged children            |       |          |
| It's better for an adolescent to stay up late studying than it is to get sleep |       |          |

Notes: Dark blue represents those that responded either “somewhat disagree” or “strongly disagree” with each myth. Light blue represents those that reported either “neutral,” “somewhat agree,” or “strongly agree” with each myth. Table 1
Myths pertaining to adolescent sleep

| Myth                                                                                                                              | Falseness† | Public health significance‡ |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|-----------------------------|
| 1. “Falling asleep in class means an adolescent lacks motivation.”                                                                | 4.8        | 4.3                         |
| 2. “It’s better for an adolescent who has a test to stay up late studying than it is to get sleep.”                               | 4.5        | 4.4                         |
| 3. “If adolescents can’t get up for school, they are lazy.”                                                                       | 4.4        | 4.2                         |
| 4. “An adolescent’s sleep schedule is largely out of their control.”                                                              | 4.3        | 4.0                         |
| 5. “If school starts later, adolescents will just stay up that much later.”                                                       | 4.1        | 4.6                         |
| 6. “Energy drinks or other stimulants can counteract the negative effects from sleep deprivation for an adolescent.”              | 4.1        | 4.4                         |
| 7. “Melatonin is safe for an adolescent because it is natural.”                                                                   | 4.0        | 4.0                         |
| 8. “Adolescents need much less sleep than school-aged children.”                                                                  | 3.9        | 4.0                         |
| 9. “Going to bed and waking up late on the weekends is no big deal for adolescents, as long as they get enough sleep during that time.” | 3.8        | 4.2                         |
| 10. “Getting too much sleep is bad for an adolescent.”                                                                            | 3.5        | 3.5                         |

†Falseness is measured on a scale from 1 (“not at all false”) to 5 (“extremely false”). A higher mean falseness rating indicates stronger and more conclusive scientific evidence to counter the myth, according to the experts in pediatric sleep research and clinical practice.
‡Public health significance is measured on a scale from 1 (“not at all important for public health”) to 5 (“extremely important for public health”). A higher mean falseness rating indicates greater urgency from a public health standpoint for refuting the myth, according to the experts in pediatric sleep research and clinical practice. Table 2
Demographic characteristics of the sample of parents/caregivers to adolescents (n = 200)

| Variable                             | N  | %  |
|--------------------------------------|----|----|
| Gender                               |    |    |
| Male                                 | 100| 50 |
| Female                               | 100| 50 |
| Age                                  |    |    |
| 18–29                                | 13 | 7  |
| 30–44                                | 95 | 48 |
| 45–59                                | 77 | 39 |
| 60+                                  | 15 | 8  |
| Combined Race/Ethnicity              |    |    |
| White, non-Hispanic                 | 99 | 50 |
| Black, non-Hispanic                 | 34 | 17 |
| Other, non-Hispanic                 | 5  | 3  |
| Hispanic                             | 43 | 22 |
| 2+, non-Hispanic                    | 7  | 4  |
| Asian, non-Hispanic                 | 12 | 6  |
| 5-level education                    |    |    |
| Less than High school                | 11 | 6  |
| High school graduate or equivalent    | 35 | 18 |
| Vocational/tech school/some college/ associates | 90 | 45 |
| Bachelor’s degree                    | 40 | 20 |
| Post grad study/professional degree  | 24 | 12 |
| Marital status                       |    |    |
| Married                              | 132| 66 |
| Widowed                              | 3  | 2  |
| Divorced                             | 17 | 9  |
| Separated                            | 7  | 4  |
| Never married                        | 41 | 21 |
| Living with partner                  |    |    |
| Current employment status            |    |    |
| Working (as a paid employee)        | 114| 57 |
| Working (self-employed)             | 21 | 11 |
| Not working (on temporary layoff from a job) | 10 | 5  |
| Not working (looking for work)      | 10 | 5  |
| Not working (retired)               | 6  | 3  |
| Not working (disabled)              | 15 | 78 |
| Not working (other)                 | 24 | 12 |
| 4-Level household income             |    |    |
| Less than $30,000                   | 48 | 24 |
| $30,000 to under $60,000            | 54 | 27 |
| $60,000 to under $100,000           | 47 | 24 |
| $100,000 or more                    | 51 | 2  |
| Metropolitan area flag               |    |    |
| Non-metro area                      | 34 | 17 |
| Metro area                          | 166| 83 |
| Household size                       |    |    |
| Single (live alone)                 | 20 | 10 |
| One other person                     | 28 | 14 |
| Two other people                     | 38 | 19 |
| Three other people                   | 48 | 24 | Variable | N | %
--- | --- | ---
Four other people | 29 | 15
Five other people | 37 | 18.5 