# Sleep Disorders in Adolescents

## abstract
Chronic sleep deprivation is a common, treatable condition among adolescents. Growing literature supports a myriad consequences that impact overall health, behavior, mood, and academic performance in this vulnerable age group during a time when there are rapid changes in physical development and emotional regulation. This article reviews the epidemiology and health effects of sleep deprivation in adolescents as well as common disorders leading to sleep loss and evidence to support treatment. Although a variety of important sleep disorders may disrupt quality of sleep in adolescents, such as obstructive sleep apnea, restless leg syndrome, and narcolepsy, this article will focus on common disorders that affect the quantity of sleep, such as poor sleep hygiene, circadian rhythm disorders, and insomnia. # EPIDEMIOLOGY OF SLEEP DEPRIVATION IN ADOLESCENTS

The average sleep needed for an adolescent to maintain proper health is 8 to 10 hours per night. This recommendation is based on the American Academy of Sleep Medicine expert panel, which reviewed studies on general health, cardiovascular health, metabolism, mental health, and longevity as they relate to sleep duration. The duration applies to total sleep over a 24-hour span and is irrespective of other important aspects of sleep, such as circadian timing and continuity.

Sleep deprivation in adolescents is common. The Youth Risk Behavior Survey found that 72.7% of students reported an average of <8 hours of sleep on school nights. This is similar to the National Sleep Foundation poll, which reported that 62% of students get <8 hours of sleep on week nights. Seniors were the most sleep deprived, with 75% reporting <8 hours of sleep per night; girls and African Americans may be disproportionately affected. Subjective reports of sleep duration are typically less than objective measures, such as actigraphy; therefore, the prevalence of sleep deprivation may be more severe than what is indicated by survey data.

## HEALTH CONSEQUENCES OF SLEEP DEPRIVATION

Lack of sleep is associated with multiple health and academic consequences. First, mood and risk of depression are correlated with sleep duration. Self-reports of poor mood, emotional regulation, and self-harm increase with sleep restriction. The relationship between mood and sleep is complex and bidirectional because poor mood and anxiety can worsen insomnia and vice versa. However, data support improvement in depressive symptoms when sleep time is extended.

## CAUSES OF SLEEP DEPRIVATION IN ADOLESCENTS

Apart from voluntary sleep restriction, there are a variety of sleep issues that can impact the quantity of sleep. This article will discuss poor sleep hygiene, circadian rhythm disorders, and insomnia as well as examine the data to support treatment strategies.

### Poor Sleep Hygiene

Sleep hygiene refers to the behaviors and environmental factors that can affect sleep; these factors are typically modifiable. Some aspects of good sleep hygiene include following a nighttime routine, maintaining a consistent sleep schedule, keeping the sleeping environment cool (68° F–72°F) and free from noise, and avoiding disruptors of sleep, such as light and screen time.

### Delayed Sleep-Wake Phase Disorder

Pubertal onset corresponds with a biologically mediated shift in sleep timing with a predisposition to a later sleep-wake cycle. This shift is mediated by 2 distinct processes. First, the homeostatic drive to sleep, which increases with increased wake. time, accumulates slower during adolescence. This translates into a longer time to fall asleep and easier ability to stay awake at night when comparing postpubertal and prepubertal teenagers. Second, melatonin secretion shifts to a later time, causing a delay in the circadian rhythm. A delay in circadian physiology predisposes to a mismatch between an adolescent’s preferred sleep time and social demands, such as school. Delayed sleep-wake phase disorder (DSPD) is diagnosed when this mismatch causes functional impairment. An adolescent with DSPD has a normal quantity and quality of sleep when allowed to sleep at will. However, when she or he sleeps at the wrong times on the basis of social demands, DSPD is common. Studies show a prevalence as high as 14% in the adolescent population.

Treatment strategies for DSPD are listed in Table 2.

Light exposure is known to affect circadian timing, but studies evaluating both late light avoidance and using bright light in the morning are limited in adolescents. In a randomized controlled trial of adolescents with DSPD who received early morning light exposure and sleep education, the average sleep latency decreased by 43 minutes and sleep increased by 72 minutes compared with the control group. More data are needed to continue to push for this initiative. Data from a 2017 Cochrane Review on this topic suggest several possible benefits, but higher-quality primary studies are needed.

## TABLE 2 Treatment of DSPD
- Step 1: Avoid bright lights for 30 min before the target bedtime
- Step 2: Shift the bedtime earlier; shift by 15–20 min earlier each day
- Step 3: Consider use of melatonin; small doses (0.5–1 mg) are effective. Melatonin should be given 4–6 h before the current sleep time
- Step 4: Get early morning light; bright lights early in the morning help shift the circadian rhythm to an earlier time point. The one caveat is with extreme delay in the circadian rhythm. If the adolescent routinely wakes up 3 h later on a weekend than they do on weekdays, then bright lights first thing in the morning on a weekday should be avoided. The ideal timing to begin light exposure is 3 h before the time that the adolescent naturally wakes up on a weekend
- Step 5: Keep the schedule for bedtime and wake time the same throughout the week

Delayed school start times present a variety of logistic and social challenges, including transportation difficulties, decreased interaction between parents and adolescents, and extracurricular scheduling problems. California recently became the first state to mandate delayed start times for middle and high schools, with the goal being to implement this mandate by July 2022.

## TABLE 1 Diagnostic Criteria for DSPD
- Significant delay in the major sleep episode compared with wake time and sleep time that is desired or required
- Symptoms are present for .3 mo
- If allowed to choose sleep schedule, patients show improved sleep quality and duration but maintain a delayed phase in their sleep-wake cycle
- Sleep diary or actigraphy for 7–14 d shows delay in time of sleep
- Sleep disturbance is not better explained by another cause

Insomnia refers to a decrease in sleep due to difficulty falling asleep, difficulty staying asleep, or awakening too early. Psychophysiological insomnia (PI) is a common subtype of insomnia. It is characterized by the inability to fall asleep or stay asleep due to the intrusion of anxious or stressful thoughts while in bed. Insomnia is common among adolescents, with rates ranging between 7% and 40% on the basis of the criteria used. Those with PI often sleep better in novel environments, such as hotel rooms, which can aid in narrowing the differential. Negative associations with sleep can lead to progressive anxiety with perpetuation of the insomnia. Unfortunately, chronicity of PI is high in adolescents, with up to 88% of those with a history of PI reporting difficulties with ongoing sleep. Treatment of Insomnia With CBTiStimulus control therapy: If unable to fall asleep after ∼20 min, leave the bed until feeling drowsyJournaling: Make a “worry list” for ∼5 min each day after schoolParadoxical intent: Think about quietly staying awake instead of actively trying to go to sleep to decrease anxiety around bedtimeProgressive relaxation: Slow, deep breaths while resting in bed and slowly tensing, then relaxing, individual muscles in the body, starting with the legs and moving upwardSleep restriction: Artificially limiting the sleep opportunity to less than what the adolescent naturally needs; once sleeping more consistently, the sleep opportunity is increased

insomnia. Asking about intrusive thoughts and anxiety in bed is vital to distinguish PI from DSPD. Both sleep disorders can also coexist. Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBTi) is an effective treatment of PI in adults that is based on more than a decade of research into both short-term and long-term improvement. CBTi is shown to be more effective than conventional sleep aids in the long-term for adults. Table 3 includes the common components of CBTi. Data for CBTi in adolescents are not as robust, but studies do indicate benefit for this population. A randomized controlled trial with Internet-based individual therapy and group therapy used 6 weekly sessions in which participants received counseling on sleep hygiene, sleep restriction, stimulus control, psychoeducation, and relaxation techniques. The study tracked both subjective report of sleep symptoms as well as objective sleep measures using actigraphy. Those receiving CBTi showed improvements in sleep onset latency, sleep efficiency, total sleep time, and waking after sleep onset in both CBTi groups compared with the control group. Similarly, subjective reports of insomnia and symptoms of sleep deprivation improved in both groups. A 1-year follow-up study showed persistent benefit or improvement in sleep efficiency and quality-of-life scores in both treatment groups. Less rigorous studies also indicate benefit of CBTi for sleep parameters in adolescents. However, more studies looking at long-term benefits, ideal method of delivery, and comparison of CBTi to pharmacologic therapy are needed.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Over the past 4 decades, sleep scientists have developed an understanding of the mechanisms that regulate sleep, the normative values of sleep, as well as the health consequences of sleep deprivation. However, over these same 4 decades, the incidence of sleep deprivation appears to be increasing. With growing literature to support the role of good sleep health and efficacy of treatments, there is an increased need to proactively screen adolescents for common sleep disorders. Awareness about sleep is increasing, partly because of wearable technologies and trackers. With this awareness and accessibility must come strategies to harness data and effectively deliver evidence-based care. Healthcare providers should continue to advocate for changes at both the individual level and community level, such as with delayed school start times. Further research is required to understand which strategies best promote optimal sleep health for adolescents to guide future initiatives.

ABBREVIATIONS
CBTi: cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia
DSPD: delayed sleep-wake phase disorder
PI: psychophysiological insomnia hunger and appetite.         Ann Intern Med.                24. Pollak CP, Bright D. Caffeine                           melatonin.     Lancet. 1991;337(8750):
2004;141(11):846–850                                             consumption and weekly sleep patterns                  1121–1124
13. Van Dongen HP, Maislin G, Mullington                              in US seventh-, eighth-, and ninth-               36. Auger RR, Burgess HJ, Emens JS, Deriy
JM, Dinges DF. The cumulative cost of                            graders. Pediatrics. 2003;111(1):42–46                 LV, Thomas SM, Sharkey KM. Clinical
additional wakefulness: dose-response                       25. Martin CA, Hiscock H, Rinehart N, et al.                practice guideline for the treatment of
effects on neurobehavioral functions                             Associations between sleep hygiene                     intrinsic circadian rhythm sleep-wake
and sleep physiology from chronic                                and sleep problems in adolescents with                 disorders: Advanced Sleep-Wake Phase
sleep restriction and total sleep                                ADHD: a cross-sectional study. J Atten                 Disorder (ASWPD), Delayed Sleep-Wake
deprivation.     Sleep. 2003;26(2):117–126                       Disord. 2020;24(4):545–554                             Phase Disorder (DSWPD), Non-24-Hour
14. Fredriksen K, Rhodes J, Reddy R, Way N.                      26. Mindell JA, Meltzer LJ, Carskadon MA,                   Sleep-Wake Rhythm Disorder (N24SWD),
Sleepless in Chicago: tracking the                               Chervin RD. Developmental aspects of                   and Irregular Sleep-Wake Rhythm
effects of adolescent sleep loss during                          sleep hygiene: findings from the 2004                  Disorder (ISWRD). An update for 2015:
the middle school years.          Child Dev.                     National Sleep Foundation Sleep in                     an American Academy of Sleep
2004;75(1):84–95                                                 America Poll.     Sleep Med. 2009;10(7):               Medicine clinical practice guideline.
771–779                                                J Clin Sleep Med. 2015;11(10):
15. Curcio G, Ferrara M, De Gennaro L.                                                                                       1199–1236
Sleep loss, learning capacity and                           27. Taylor DJ, Jenni OG, Acebo C, Carskadon            37. Gradisar M, Dohnt H, Gardner G, et al. A
academic performance.           Sleep Med Rev.                   MA. Sleep tendency during extended                     randomized controlled trial of
2006;10(5):323–337                                               wakefulness: insights into adolescent                  cognitive-behavior therapy plus bright
16. Wolfson AR, Carskadon MA.                                         sleep regulation and behavior.           J Sleep       light therapy for adolescent delayed
Understanding adolescents’ sleep                                 Res. 2005;14(3):239–244                                sleep phase disorder.         Sleep (Basel).
patterns and school performance:                            28. Carskadon MA, Vieira C, Acebo C.                        2011;34(12):1671–1680
a critical appraisal.      Sleep Med Rev.                        Association between puberty and                   38. Adolescent Sleep Working Group;
2003;7(6):491–506                                                delayed phase preference.          Sleep. 1993;        Committee on Adolescence; Council on
17. Levenson JC, Shensa A, Sidani JE,                                 16(3):258–262                                          School Health. School start times for
Colditz JB, Primack BA. Social media                        29. Roenneberg T, Kuehnle T, Pramstaller                    adolescents.     Pediatrics. 2014;134(3):
use before bed and sleep disturbance                             PP, et al. A marker for the end of                     642–649
among young adults in the United                                 adolescence. Curr Biol. 2004;14(24):              39. Owens JA, Belon K, Moss P. Impact of
States: a nationally representative                              R1038–R1039                                            delaying school start time on
study.   Sleep. 2017;40(9)                                  30. Carskadon MA, Acebo C, Jenni OG.                        adolescent sleep, mood, and behavior.
18. Buxton OM, Chang AM, Spilsbury JC, Bos                            Regulation of adolescent sleep:                        Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2010;164(7):
T, Emsellem H, Knutson KL. Sleep in the                          implications for behavior.        Ann N Y Acad         608–614
modern family: protective family                                 Sci. 2004;1021:276–291                            40. Dexter D, Bijwadia J, Schilling D,
routines for child and adolescent sleep.                    31. Crowley SJ, Acebo C, Fallone G,                         Applebaugh G. Sleep, sleepiness and
Sleep Health. 2015;1(1):15–27                                    Carskadon MA. Estimating dim light                     school start times: a preliminary study.
19. Vijakkhana N, Wilaisakditipakorn T,                               melatonin onset (DLMO) phase in                        WMJ. 2003;102(1):44–46
Ruedeekhajorn K, Pruksananonda C,                                adolescents using summer or school-               41. Vorona RD, Szklo-Coxe M, Wu A, Dubik
Chonchaiya W. Evening media exposure                             melatonin onset (DLMO) phase in                        WMJ. 2003;102(1):44–46
reduces night-time sleep.         Acta Paediatr.                 29(12):1632–1641                                       crash rates in two neighboring
2015;104(3):306–312                                         32. Carskadon MA, Acebo C, Richardson GS,                   southeastern Virginia cities with
20. Bruni O, Sette S, Fontanesi L, Baiocco R,                         Tate BA, Seifer R. An approach to                      different high school start times. J Clin
Laghi F, Baumgartner E. Technology use                           studying circadian rhythms of                          Sleep Med. 2011;7(2):145–151
and sleep quality in preadolescence                              adolescent humans. J Biol Rhythms.                42. Danner F, Phillips B. Adolescent sleep,
and adolescence.        J Clin Sleep Med.                        1997;12(3):278–289                                     school start times, and teen motor
2015;11(12):1433–1441                                       33. Lovato N, Gradisar M, Short M, Dohnt H,                 vehicle crashes. J Clin Sleep Med. 2008;
21. Garrison MM, Christakis DA. The impact                            Micic G. Delayed sleep phase disorder                  4(6):533–535
of a healthy media use intervention on                           in an Australian school-based sample of           43. Marx R, Tanner-Smith EE, Davison CM,
sleep in preschool children.          Pediatrics.                adolescents.     J Clin Sleep Med. 2013;               et al. Later school start times for
2012;130(3):492–499                                              9(9):939–944                                           supporting the education, health, and
22. Campbell SS, Broughton RJ. Rapid                             34. van Geijlswijk IM, Korzilius HP, Smits                  well-being of high school students.
decline in body temperature before                               MG. The use of exogenous melatonin in                  Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;7:
sleep:   fluffing the physiological pillow?                      delayed sleep phase disorder: a meta-                  CD009467
Chronobiol Int. 1994;11(2):126–131                               analysis.   Sleep. 2010;33(12):1605–1614          44. Sateia M. International Classification of
23. Troynikov O, Watson CG, Nawaz N. Sleep                       35. Dahlitz M, Alvarez B, Vignau J, English J,              Sleep Disorders, 3rd ed. Darien, IL:
environments and sleep physiology:                               Arendt J, Parkes JD. Delayed sleep                     American Academy of Sleep Medicine;
a review. J Therm Biol. 2018;78:192–203                          phase syndrome response to                             2014

S208                                                                                                                                                                  KANSAGRA | Reference Number | Authors | Title | Journal | Year | Volume(Issue) | Pages |
|------------------|---------|-------|---------|------|----------------|-------|
| 45 | Dohnt H, Gradisar M, Short MA | Insomnia and its symptoms in adolescents: comparing DSM-IV and ICSD-II diagnostic criteria | J Clin Sleep Med | 2012 | 8(3) | 295–299 |
| 46 | Hysing M, Pallesen S, Stormark KM, Lundervold AJ, Sivertsen B | Sleep patterns and insomnia among adolescents: a population-based study | J Sleep Res | 2013 | 22(5) | 549–556 |
| 47 | Johnson EO, Roth T, Schultz L, Breslau N | Epidemiology of DSM-IV insomnia in adolescence: lifetime prevalence, chronicity, and an emergent gender difference | Pediatrics | 2006 | 117(2) | Available at: www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/117/2/e247 |
| 48 | Morin CM, Bootzin RR, Buysse DJ, Edinger JD, Espie CA, Lichstein KL | Psychological and behavioral treatment of insomnia: update of the recent evidence (1998-2004) | Sleep | 2006 | 29(11) | 1398–1414 |
| 49 | Backhaus J, Hohagen F, Voderholzer U, Riemann D | Long-term effectiveness of a short-term cognitive-behavioral group treatment for primary insomnia | Eur |  |  |  |
| 50 | Beaulieu-Bonneau S, Ivers H, Guay B, Morin CM | Long-term maintenance of therapeutic gains associated with cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia delivered alone or combined with zolpidem | Sleep | 2017 | 40(3) |  |
| 51 | Morin CM, Colecchi C, Stone J, Sood R, Brink D | Behavioral and pharmacological therapies for late-life insomnia: a randomized controlled trial | JAMA | 1999 | 281(11) | 991–999 |
| 52 | de Bruin EJ, Bögels SM, Oort FJ, Meijer AM | Efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia in adolescents: a randomized controlled trial with internet therapy, group therapy and a waiting list condition | Sleep (Basel) | 2015 | 38(12) | 1913–1926 |
| 53 | de Bruin EJ, Bögels SM, Oort FJ, Meijer AM | Improvements of adolescent psychopathology after insomnia treatment: results from a randomized controlled trial over 1 year | J Child Psychol Psychiatry | 2018 | 59(5) | 509–522 |
| 54 | De Bruin EJ, van Steensel FJ, Meijer AM | Cost-effectiveness of group and internet cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia in adolescents: results from a randomized controlled trial | Sleep (Basel) | 2016 | 39(8) | 1571–1581 |
| 55 | Hendricks MC, Ward CM, Grodin LK, Slifer KJ | Multicomponent cognitive-behavioural intervention to improve sleep in adolescents: a multiple baseline design | Behav Cogn Psychother | 2014 | 42(3) | 368–373 |
| 56 | de Bruin EJ, Oort FJ, Bögels SM, Meijer AM | Efficacy of internet and group-administered cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia in adolescents: a pilot study | Behav Sleep Med | 2014 | 12(3) | 235–254 |
| 57 | Norell-Clarke A, Nyander E, Jansson-Fröjmark M | Sleepless in Sweden: a single subject study of effects of cognitive therapy for insomnia on three adolescents | Behav Cogn Psychother | 2011 | 39(3) | 367–374 |
| 58 | Knutson KL, Van Cauter E, Rathouz PJ, DeLeire T, Lauderdale DS | Trends in the prevalence of short sleepers in the USA: 1975-2006 | Sleep | 2010 | 33(1) | 37–45 | 