# The Great Sleep Recession: Changes in Sleep Duration Among US Adolescents, 1991–2012

## abstract

**BACKGROUND:** Average nightly sleep times precipitously decline from childhood through adolescence. There is increasing concern that historical shifts also occur in overall adolescent sleep time.

**METHODS:** Data were drawn from Monitoring the Future, a yearly, nationally representative cross-sectional survey of adolescents in the United States from 1991 to 2012 (N = 272 077) representing birth cohorts from 1973 to 2000. Adolescents were asked how often they get ≥7 hours of sleep and how often they get less sleep than they should. Age-period-cohort models were estimated.

**RESULTS:** Adolescent sleep generally declined over 20 years; the largest change occurred between 1991–1995 and 1996–2000. Age-period-cohort analyses indicate adolescent sleep is best described across demographic subgroups by an age effect, with sleep decreasing across adolescence, and a period effect, indicating that sleep is consistently decreasing, especially in the late 1990s and early 2000s. There was also a cohort effect among some subgroups, including male subjects, white subjects, and those in urban areas, with the earliest cohorts obtaining more sleep. Girls were less likely to report getting ≥7 hours of sleep compared with boys, as were racial/ethnic minorities, students living in urban areas, and those of low socioeconomic status (SES). However, racial/ethnic minorities and adolescents of low SES were more likely to self-report adequate sleep, compared with white subjects and those of higher SES.

**CONCLUSIONS:** Declines in self-reported adolescent sleep across the last 20 years are concerning. Mismatch between perceptions of adequate sleep and actual reported sleep times for racial/ethnic minorities and adolescents of low SES are additionally concerning and suggest that health education and literacy approaches may be warranted.

## WHAT’S KNOWN ON THIS SUBJECT

Adequate sleep is critical for adolescent health. Available data suggest a historical downward trend in sleep behavior, but there has been no rigorous evaluation of recent US trends.

## WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS

The proportion of adolescents who regularly obtain ≥7 hours of sleep is decreasing. Decreases in sleep exhibit period effects that are constant across adolescents according to gender, race, socioeconomic factors, and urbanicity. The gender gap in adequate sleep is widening. Inadequately short or long sleep times are associated with a wide range of adverse outcomes in adolescence, including problems in school performance, mental health, reckless behavior, substance use, and weight gain. Risk factors for inadequate sleep include older adolescent age, negative affect and social inhibition, sedentary behavior, and low socioeconomic status (SES). Adolescence is a particularly vulnerable developmental period for the emergence of inadequate sleep patterns. Population-based estimates indicate that approximately one-fourth to one-third of adolescents get inadequate nightly sleep, and there is rising concern in the scientific literature (as well as the lay media) that these estimates are increasing. Although the underlying reasons for this potential increase are unknown, there has been speculation regarding the effects of increased Internet and social media use and pressures due to the heightened competitiveness of the college admissions process. Empirical data on such factors are scarce, however.

The present study provides, to the best of our knowledge, the first systematic analysis of age, period, and cohort effects in adolescent sleep patterns, harnessing nationally representative data covering .270 000 eighth, 10th, and 12th grade students in the United States with consistently measured questions on sleep duration and sleep problems for the past 2 decades.

### Measures

#### Sleep Duration and Disturbance
Two questions captured sleep patterns among respondents. Question wording and response options were constant across time and across grade. First, respondents were asked, “How often do you … get at least 7 hours of sleep?” Responses were arranged on a 6-point scale from “never” to “every day.” Adolescents reporting $7 hours of sleep every day or almost every day were considered to regularly sleep $7 hours per day, versus those reporting sometimes, seldom, or never sleeping $7 hours per day.

Second, respondents were asked, “How often do you … get less sleep than you should?” Responses were arranged on a 6-point scale from “never” to “every day.” survey year and grade) to “every day” attributed to either, was estimated decreased across time as well, with (average 17.96% across survey year and grade). Adolescents reporting getting less sleep than they should never or seldom were considered to regularly obtain adequate sleep, versus those reporting every day, almost every day, or sometimes. These 2 sleep items were correlated at 0.31 (P , .0001) across survey years.

Demographic Characteristics
Analyses were stratified according to respondent-identified gender (male: 49%), race (non-Hispanic white: 63%; non-Hispanic black: 13%; Hispanic: 12%; Asian: 4%; other: 8%). Furthermore, responses were stratified according to parental SES, measured as the highest level of education of either the mother or the father, as reported by the adolescent (less than high school [10%], high school [25%], or more than high school [65%]). Finally, analyses were stratified according to urbanicity (urban: 81%), which was based on residence in metropolitan statistical areas.

Statistical Analysis
We descriptively graphed the data by age and time period and then estimated age-period-cohort effect models. Estimating age, period, and cohort effects is complicated by the linear dependency among the 3 variables (cohort = period – age). The Clayton and Shifflers model was used for these analyses. The model iteratively estimates parameters for age, period, and cohort effects and selects among them by using model fit statistics, including the Akaike information criterion and the Bayesian information criterion, likelihood-based deviance statistics, and penalizing additional degrees of freedom. An age parameter was fit first, based on the previous literature. The overall linear change (termed “drift”) that is a sum of both period and cohort effects but, because of the linear dependency of period and cohort, not able to be uniquely identified.

RESULTS
Sensitivity Analyses: Age-Period-Cohort Models by Gender, Race, Urbanicity, and SES
In a series of sensitivity analyses, we examined these models by gender, race, urbanicity, and SES and present the results in Supplemental Figs 4 through 7. The results were consistent within each subgroup examined and consistent with what was found for the total sample. There was consistent evidence of a period effect whereby sleep was decreasing regardless of age in more recent years for all subgroups, and some evidence of a positive cohort effect (ie, increase) for those born in the early 1990s, but only for self-perceived sleep. Sensitivity Analyses: Age-Period-Cohort Models Using Continuous Sleep Outcomes and the Intrinsic Estimator
An alternative age-period-cohort model was used to examine the robustness of our results using sleep outcomes as continuous variables. Results are shown in Supplemental Fig 8 (getting $7 hours of sleep) and Supplemental Fig 9 (getting adequate sleep) and are consistent with the results shown in Figs 1 and 2, respectively, with a strong declining period effect beginning in the late 1990s.

Demographic Associations With Sleep Across Time
Because the age-period-cohort analysis indicated that trends over time in adolescent sleep were primarily a period effect, the data were stratified into time bands (Table 2). Girls were less likely to report regular $7 hours of sleep compared with boys in all time periods, with odds ratios ranging from 0.66 in 2011–2012 to 0.68 in 1991–1995 and 1996–2000. All racial/ethnic groups were less likely to report regular $7 hours of sleep compared with white subjects, except for black subjects compared with white subjects in 2001–2005 (odds ratio: 1.07 [95% confidence interval: 1.02–1.12]). Nonurban students were more likely to report $7 hours of sleep compared with urban students, in all time frames. Compared with those in the lowest SES strata, adolescents in the middle and higher SES strata were more likely to report regular $7 hours of sleep, with the strongest associations for adolescents whose parents received a high school education but not more. Finally, 18- to 19-year-olds were the least likely to report regular $7 hours of sleep.

TABLE 1     Model Fit Statistics for Age-Period-Cohort Model of Adolescent Sleep in the United States

| Model Parameter         | Change in Deviance (Degrees of Freedom) |
|------------------------|------------------------------------------|
|                        | $7 Hours of Sleep/Night | Adequate Sleep |
| Age                    | –                        | –              |
| Age-drift              | 411.5 (1)a a            | 219.53 (1)a a  |
| Age-cohort             | 123.7 (4)a              | 14.29 (4)a     |
| Age-period-cohort      | 37.2 (4)                | 17.22 (4)      |
| Age-period             |                          |                |
| Age-drift              | 2254.1 (–4)aa106.7 (–4) | 226.23 (–4)25.29 (–4)a |

a Fit statistics are based on an iterative model building strategy, beginning with an age effect and then testing whether the model is significantly improved in fit when drift is added as a parameter, then cohort, then age, period, and cohort. Parameters are then removed from the full age-period-cohort parameterization to determine whether the model fit significantly decreases. The values in the table represent the change in deviance; significant positive parameters indicate that the model has significantly improved, and significant negative parameters indicate that the model has significantly worsened. FIGURE 2
Age, period, and cohort effects on the probability that US adolescents regularly report $7 hours of sleep per night from 1991 to 2012 in nationally representative samples (N = 270 899). The cohort and period time–scale contains risk ratio estimates for the effect of cohort (far left line) and period (far right line). Thin lines indicate 95% confidence intervals. The cohort estimates were compared with a referent cohort of 1980; thus, the lines can be interpreted as the average proportion of adolescents obtaining $7 hours of sleep regularly, regardless of time period, compared with the average proportion in 1980. The period estimates were compared with a referent period of 1995; thus, the lines can be interpreted as the average proportion of adolescents obtaining $7 hours of sleep regularly in that year, regardless of cohort, compared with the average proportion in 1995.

less likely to report getting adequate sleep per night compared with white adolescents. Furthermore, the relation between age 14 and 15 years and reporting $7 hours of sleep, compared with age 12 and 13 years, also changed in magnitude, from 0.7 in 1991–1995 to 0.65 in 2011–2012. Tests of interaction with time period indicated variation in reporting adequate sleep over time according to race/ethnicity (differences decreased over time) and SES. Associations between demographic characteristics and regularly reporting adequate sleep differed for several demographic variables. Conversely to what was observed for regular $7 hours of sleep, black and Hispanic students were more likely to report regularly receiving adequate sleep compared with white subjects, in all time periods. Also conversely to with the largest decrease in the percentage getting $7 hours per night is 15-year-old adolescents. Seven hours per night is 2 hours less than the 9 hours recommended by the National Sleep Foundation, indicating a particularly concerning trend toward inadequate sleep for a large portion of US adolescents at an important juncture in development.

Second, these trends were quantified in an age-period-cohort model that indicated strong and significant age and period effects in adolescent sleep in the United States and across subgroups defined according to gender, race, SES, and urbanicity. Thus, these data indicate that adolescent sleep is declining across all age groups and major sociodemographic subgroups. Cohort effects were also observed for some subgroups, particularly in $7 hours of sleep for male subjects, white subjects, and those in urban areas; those in the earliest cohorts, as well as cohorts born in the early 1990s, were more likely to report regular $7 hours of sleep compared with all other adolescents.

Third, we documented that girls are less likely to regularly report $7 hours of sleep and to feel they get adequate sleep, as are black/Hispanic adolescents and those in lower SES strata. Furthermore, the disparity according to race has increased in more recent time periods. Other demographic differences also emerged, notably that racial/ethnic minorities and adolescents in lower SES strata are simultaneously less likely to get $7 hours of sleep per night but more likely to report regularly getting adequate sleep; these findings suggest a mismatch exists between actual sleep and perceptions of adequate sleep.

We found that period effects predominantly explain decreases in adolescent sleep in nearly every demographic subgroup examined, including by gender, race, SES, and urbanicity. This finding suggests that the drivers of decreases in adolescent sleep are complex and multifaceted. FIGURE 3
Age, period, and cohort effects on the probability that US adolescents regularly report adequate sleep per night from 1991 to 2012 in nationally representative samples (N = 270 719). The cohort and period time–scale contains risk ratio estimates for the effect of cohort (far left line) and period (far right line). Thin lines indicate 95% confidence intervals. The cohort estimates were compared with a referent cohort of 1980; thus, the lines can be interpreted as the average proportion of adolescents obtaining adequate sleep regularly, regardless of time period, compared with the average proportion in 1980. The period estimates were compared with a referent period of 1995; thus, the lines can be interpreted as the average proportion of adolescents obtaining adequate sleep regularly in that year, regardless of cohort, compared with the average proportion in 1995.

sleep are those that affect all age groups simultaneously and are pervasive in their impact across many diverse demographic groups. For example, although we found that girls are less likely to report regular periods of $7 hours of sleep compared with boys in every time period, we also found that girls and boys are both decreasing in sleep and thus that the drivers of this decrease are likely similar across genders. The rapid increases in obesity in the 1990s and early 2000s, which also demonstrate a period effect across this same time frame and across all demographic groups studied, are one plausible mechanism for the observed trends. Interestingly, available data indicate that increases in obesity began leveling off in ∼2005, which roughly corresponds to the time frame in which the disparities in sleep quality and duration for racial/ethnic minorities, particularly African-American and Hispanic subjects, as well as subjects of lower SES, are well documented. A number of factors have been proposed to explain racial/ethnic differences in sleep quality, including housing quality which is on average lower for racial/ethnic minorities, as well as obesity and other conditions (eg, sleep apnea) that disrupt sleep and are seen at higher rates among Black and Hispanic children. We also note that black and Hispanic students and those of lower SES were less likely to report regularly getting $7 hours of sleep (compared with white subjects) but were more likely to report regularly getting adequate sleep. This finding suggests that minority and low SES adolescents are less accurately judging the adequacy of the sleep they are getting compared with white/high SES adolescents (ie, perceiving that insufficient amounts of sleep are adequate) or that white/high SES adolescents are more aware of the 9 hours of sleep per night guideline and thus more likely to judge the sleep that they get as inadequate; it may also be a combination of factors. The available literature indicates racial and socioeconomic differences in attitudes toward sleep, sleep patterns within families, and social activities at night that interfere with sleep, suggesting that cultural norms regarding sleep adequacy may in part underlie the mismatch between actual self-reported hours of sleep and self-reported adequacy of sleep. Further investigation into disparities in perceptions of adequate sleep, and how this disparity may translate to poor sleep patterns among minority and low SES adolescents, is critical. Our results suggest clear public health targets about health literacy in the definition of adequate sleep, reinforcing to adolescents the importance of sleep duration and quality. Differences in sleep according to gender were also documented, with | Demographic Variables         | Get 7 h of sleep (ORs (95% CIs)) | Get adequate sleep (ORs (95% CIs)) |
|------------------------------|-----------------------------------|------------------------------------|
|                              | 1991–1995 | 1996–2000 | 2001–2005 | 2006–2010 | 2011–2012 | Interactions | 1991–1995 | 1996–2000 | 2001–2005 | 2006–2010 | 2011–2012 | Interactions |
| Gender                       |           |           |           |           |           |              |           |           |           |           |           |              |
| Female                       | 0.68 (0.66–0.7) | 0.68 (0.66–0.71) | 0.7 (0.67–0.72) | 0.67 (0.64–0.69) | 0.66 (0.63–0.7) | 0.84 | 0.81 (0.78–0.83) | 0.81 (0.79–0.84) | 0.87 (0.83–0.9) | 0.82 (0.79–0.85) | 0.82 (0.77–0.87) | 0.18 |
| Male                         | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         |              | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         |              |
| Race                         |           |           |           |           |           |              |           |           |           |           |           |              |
| Black                        | 0.99 (0.95–1.04) | 0.97 (0.92–1.02) | 1.07 (1.01–1.12) | 0.84 (0.79–0.88) | 0.89 (0.81–0.97) | 0.05 | 1.58 (1.51–1.65) | 1.55 (1.47–1.64) | 1.52 (1.44–1.61) | 1.39 (1.31–1.48) | 1.15 (1.05–1.26) | 0.03 |
| Hispanic                     | 0.9 (0.85–0.94) | 0.99 (0.93–1.04) | 0.95 (0.9–1) | 0.87 (0.83–0.91) | 0.92 (0.85–0.99) | 0.90 | 1.38 (1.31–1.46) | 1.48 (1.39–1.56) | 1.39 (1.31–1.47) | 1.3 (1.23–1.37) | 1.1 (1.01–1.2) | ,0.01 |
| Asian                        | 0.86 (0.79–0.93) | 0.83 (0.76–0.9) | 0.79 (0.73–0.87) | 0.75 (0.69–0.81) | 0.99 (0.87–1.12) | 0.33 | 0.89 (0.81–0.98) | 0.9 (0.82–1) | 0.81 (0.73–0.9) | 0.85 (0.77–0.93) | 0.92 (0.8–1.06) | 0.03 |
| Other                        | 1.03 (0.98–1.09) | 1.06 (0.99–1.13) | 1.05 (0.98–1.12) | 0.83 (0.78–0.88) | 0.94 (0.86–1.02) | 0.99 | 1.27 (1.2–1.35) | 1.37 (1.28–1.47) | 1.33 (1.24–1.43) | 1.08 (1.01–1.15) | 0.98 (0.89–1.07) | 0.29 |
| White                        | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         |              | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         |              |
| Urbanicity                   |           |           |           |           |           |              |           |           |           |           |           |              |
| Nonurban                     | 1.12 (1.09–1.16) | 1.11 (1.07–1.16) | 1.06 (1.01–1.1) | 1.11 (1.06–1.15) | 1.15 (1.08–1.22) | 0.93 | 1.19 (1.15–1.23) | 1.18 (1.13–1.23) | 1.15 (1.09–1.2) | 1.14 (1.09–1.19) | 1.12 (1.05–1.2) | 0.94 |
| Urban                        | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         |              | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         |              |
| Highest parental education    |           |           |           |           |           |              |           |           |           |           |           |              |
| .High school                 | 1.33 (1.26–1.41) | 1.25 (1.17–1.34) | 1.22 (1.14–1.32) | 1.34 (1.25–1.44) | 1.34 (1.2–1.5) | 0.10 | 0.75 (0.7–0.8) | 0.65 (0.6–0.7) | 0.69 (0.64–0.74) | 0.76 (0.71–0.82) | 0.92 (0.81–1.04) | ,0.01 |
| High school                  | 1.22 (1.15–1.3) | 1.2 (1.11–1.29) | 1.07 (0.99–1.16) | 1.15 (1.07–1.25) | 1.15 (1.01–1.31) | 0.02 | 0.88 (0.83–0.94) | 0.85 (0.79–0.92) | 0.85 (0.78–0.93) | 0.86 (0.79–0.94) | 1.05 (0.91–1.21) | 0.99 |
| ,High school                 | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         |              | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         |              |
| Age, y                       |           |           |           |           |           |              |           |           |           |           |           |              |
| 18–19                       | 0.29 (0.27–0.31) | 0.27 (0.25–0.29) | 0.25 (0.23–0.27) | 0.29 (0.27–0.32) | 0.32 (0.28–0.35) | ,0.01 | 0.43 (0.4–0.46) | 0.41 (0.38–0.44) | 0.44 (0.41–0.48) | 0.41 (0.38–0.45) | 0.44 (0.39–0.49) | 0.38 |
| 16–17                       | 0.46 (0.44–0.48) | 0.42 (0.4–0.44) | 0.39 (0.38–0.42) | 0.45 (0.42–0.47) | 0.43 (0.39–0.46) | 0.09 | 0.51 (0.49–0.53) | 0.5 (0.48–0.53) | 0.54 (0.51–0.57) | 0.52 (0.49–0.55) | 0.46 (0.42–0.5) | 0.36 |
| 14–15                       | 0.7 (0.67–0.73) | 0.7 (0.66–0.73) | 0.67 (0.64–0.71) | 0.69 (0.66–0.73) | 0.65 (0.6–0.7) | 0.01 | 0.74 (0.72–0.77) | 0.76 (0.72–0.8) | 0.79 (0.75–0.83) | 0.77 (0.73–0.81) | 0.68 (0.63–0.74) | 0.07 |
| 12–13                       | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         |              | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         | 1         |              |

The interaction with each variable was tested by year, with year modeled as a continuous variable to determine whether the magnitude of the odds ratios (ORs) were increasing or decreasing over time. CI, confidence interval.

girls regularly reporting less sleep. assessed in studies of adolescent sleep. In addition, Monitoring the Future is a large study with a wide range of measurement topics, such that particular depth in any single area is outside the scope of the larger study. The strengths of our assessments, however, are that question wording and placement, as well as study design and methods, were invariant for the 20 years of data collection. This design enables long-term assessments of historical trends as well as estimating age-period-cohort models; such data are unique in behavioral health, such that limitations in the depth of assessment are outweighed by the ability to assess long-term trends.

CONCLUSIONS
Declining reported sleep duration as well as perceptions of adequate sleep among US adolescents is potentially a significant public health concern. The present study provides a rigorous assessment of age, period, and cohort effects in adolescent sleep in the United States using self-reported national data from over 270,000 adolescents across 2 decades. Public health approaches to increasing health literacy regarding sleep for adolescents (particularly adolescents from low SES backgrounds) are critical to changing the trajectory of adolescent sleep in the United States

| **Study** | **Findings** |
|-----------|---------------|
| Wolfson AR, Carskadon MA | Understanding adolescents’ sleep patterns and school performance: a critical appraisal. |
| Smaldone A, Honig JC, Byrne MW | Sleepless in America: inadequate sleep and relationships to health and well-being of our nation’s children. |
| Meldrum RC, Restivo E | The behavioral and health consequences of sleep deprivation among US high school students: relative deprivation matters. |
| O’Dea JA, Dibley MJ, Rankin NM | Low sleep and low socioeconomic status predict high body mass index: a 4-year longitudinal study of Australian schoolchildren. |
| Spiers N, Bebbington P, McManus S, Brugha TS, Jenkins R, Meltzer H | Age and birth cohort differences in the prevalence of common mental disorder in England: National Psychiatric Morbidity Surveys 1993-2007. |
| Laberge L, Petit D, Simard C, Vitaro F, Tremblay RE, Montplaisir J | Development of sleep patterns in early adolescence. |
| Condén E, Ekselius L, Aslund C | Type D personality is associated with sleep problems in adolescents. Results from a population-based cohort study of Swedish adolescents. |
| Chen G, Ratcliffe J, Olds T, Magarey A, Jones M, Leslie E | BMI, health behaviors, and quality of life in children and adolescents: a school-based study. |
| Matricciani L, Olds T, Williams M | A review of evidence for the claim that children are sleeping less than in the past. |
| Roberts RE, Roberts CR, Xing Y | Restricted sleep among adolescents: prevalence, incidence, persistence, and associated factors. |
| Cain N, Gradisar M | Electronic media use and sleep in school-aged children and adolescents: a review. |
| Lenhart A | Teens and mobile phones over the past five years: Pew Internet looks back. |
| Jones M, Ginsburg KR | Less Stress, More Success: A New Approach to Guiding Your Teen Through College Admissions and Beyond. |
| Keyes KM, Utz RL, Robinson W, Li G | What is a cohort effect? Comparison of three statistical methods for modeling cohort effects in obesity prevalence in the United States, 1971-2006. |
| National Sleep Foundation | Teens and sleep. | Feature on Prescription Drugs.                          United States: the Whitehall II Study and        | 36. Resta O, Foschino Barbaro MP, Bonfitto P, et al. Low sleep quality and daytime sleepiness in obese patients without obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome. J Intern Med. 2003;253(5):536–543
---|---
26. Xi B, Mi J, Zhao M, et al. Trends in abdominal obesity among US children and adolescents.        Pediatrics. 2014;134(2). Available at: www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/134/2/e334 | 37. McLaughlin Crabtree V, Beal Korhonen J, Montgomery-Downs HE, Faye Jones V, O’Brien LM, Gozal D. Cultural influences on the bedtime behaviors of young children.   Sleep Med. 2005;6(4):319–324
27. Peiró-Velert C, Valencia-Peris A, González LM, García-Massó X, Serra-Añó P, Devís-Devís J. Screen media usage, sleep time and academic performance in adolescents: clustering a self-organizing maps analysis.       PLoS One. 2014;9(6): e99478 | 38. Spilsbury JC, Storfer-Isser A, Drotar D, Rosen CL, Kirchner HL, Redline S. Effects of the home environment on school-aged children’s sleep.     Sleep. 2005;28(11): 1419–1427
28. Patel NP, Grandner MA, Xie D, Branas CC, Gooneratne N.       “Sleep disparity”      in the population: poor sleep quality is strongly associated with poverty and ethnicity. BMC Public Health. 2010;10:475 | 39. Johnson EO, Roth T, Schultz L, Breslau N. Epidemiology of DSM-IV insomnia in adolescence: lifetime prevalence, chronicity, and an emergent gender difference.   Pediatrics. 2006;117(2). Available at: www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/117/2/e247
29. Whinnery J, Jackson N, Rattanaumpawan P, Grandner MA. Short and long sleep duration associated with race/ethnicity, sociodemographics, and socioeconomic position.    Sleep. 2014;37(3):601–611 | 40. Petrov ME, Lichstein KL, Baldwin CM. Prevalence of sleep disorders by sex and ethnicity among older adolescents and emerging adults: relations to daytime functioning, working memory and mental health.     J Adolesc. 2014;37(5): 587–597
30. Stranges S, Dorn JM, Shipley MJ, et al. Correlates of short and long sleep duration: a cross-cultural comparison between the United Kingdom and the United States: the Whitehall II Study and the Western New York Health Study. Am J Epidemiol. 2008;168(12):1353–1364 |
31. Spilsbury JC, Storfer-Isser A, Drotar D, et al. Sleep behavior in an urban US sample of school-aged children.            Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2004;158(10): 988–994 |
32. Stein MA, Mendelsohn J, Obermeyer WH, Amromin J, Benca R. Sleep and behavior problems in school-aged children.                Pediatrics. 2001;107(4). Available at: www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/107/4/E60 |
33. Lallukka T, Arber S, Rahkonen O, Lahelma E. Complaints of insomnia among midlife employed people: the contribution of childhood and present socioeconomic circumstances. Sleep Med. 2010;11(9): 828–836 |
34. Passchier-Vermeer W, Passchier WF. Noise exposure and public health.                     Environ Health Perspect. 2000;108(suppl 1):123–131 |
35. Grandner MA, Patel NP, Perlis ML, et al. Obesity, diabetes, and exercise associated with sleep-related complaints in the American population.           Z Gesundh Wiss. 2011;19(5):463–474 | 