## Background

although sleep-related breathing disorder dysregulation of the autonomic nervous system have been linked to insulin resistance in adults, this has not been as well established in children. We hypothesized that the severity of SRBD in adolescents was associated with metabolic impairment.

## Methods

Polysomnography was performed on obese, Latino males referred for snoring. The frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance test was used to assess glucose homeostasis. Total-body dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry was used to quantify adiposity.

## Results

a total of 22 males (mean age ± SD: 13.4 ± 2.1 y, BMI z-score 2.4 ± 0.3, obstructive apnea hypopnea index 4.1 ± 3.2) were studied. after correcting for age and adiposity in multiple-regression models, Log frequency of desaturation (defined as ≥3% drop in oxygen saturation from baseline) negatively correlated with insulin sensitivity. Sleep efficiency was positively correlated with glucose effectiveness (SG, the capacity of glucose to mediate its own disposal). The Log total arousal index was positively correlated with Log homeostasis model assessment–estimated insulin resistance.

## Conclusion

Sleep fragmentation and intermittent hypoxemia are associated with metabolic impairment in obese adolescent Latino males independent of age and adiposity. We speculate that SRBD potentiates the risk for development of metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes in the obese adolescent population. The frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance test (FSIVGTT) allows simultaneous assessment of SI and pancreatic β-cell function through the use of a mathematical model such as the Bergman minimal model.

The aim of this study was to use the FSIVGTT to describe the relationship between glucose–insulin physiology and SRBD in a group of obese adolescent Latino males. We hypothesized that the measures of SRBD severity (such as the desaturation index (DESAT) and the obstructive apnea hypopnea index (OAHI)) would be associated with measures of impaired glucose metabolism derived from FSIVGTT, and that these associations would be independent of the degree of obesity.

Childhood obesity remains a critical health issue associated with long-term consequences worldwide. The early stages of metabolic dysfunction, as it pertains to children, have not been wholly identified. Sleep-related breathing disorder has a high prevalence in obese individuals and has been linked to insulin resistance in the adult population. In addition, SRBD likely contributes to the pathophysiology of the metabolic syndrome. Although the mechanisms linking SRBD to the metabolic syndrome are not fully known, intermittent hypoxemia, altered inflammatory pathways, and other factors may play a role. RESULTS

A total of 22 obese Latino males with a mean age of 13.2 ± 2.1 y completed the study. The average duration between the polysomnography and FSIVGTT was 72.1 ± 67.8 d. None of the subjects received any treatment for SRBD between these two components of the study. All subjects had BMI ≥95th percentile for age/gender and the mean BMI z-score was 2.4 ± 0.3. Polysomnography results revealed a mean OAHI of 4.1 ± 3.2 events/h with a range of 1.0–14.1. On average, the subjects had 9.8 ± 11.1 desaturation events/h of sleep. Assuming a cutoff OAHI of 5 events/h, we classified 16 of the subjects as having no or mild SRBD (OAHI <5), with the other 6 having moderate to severe SRBD (OAHI ≥5). Table 1 also shows considerable variability in the metabolic parameters across subjects. Please refer to the Methods section for a description of the parameters measured by the study.

table 1. Demographic, sleep, and metabolic characteristics

| Variable, n = 22                       | Mean ± SD           | Range                  |
|----------------------------------------|---------------------|------------------------|
| Age (y)                                | 13.4 ± 2.1          | 10.3–17.9              |
| BMI (kg/m2)                           | 34.4 ± 6.3          | 25.3–52.5              |
| BMI (z-score)                         | 2.4 ± 0.3           | 2.0–3.2                |
| Total body fat (g)                   | 35,869 ± 12,113     | 18,858–63,610          |
| Total percentage body fat              | 41 ± 5.0            | 29.9–50.0              |
| Trunk fat (g)                         | 16,347 ± 4,996      | 8,871–25,914           |
| Percentage trunk fat                   | 40.8 ± 4.4          | 30.9–46.0              |
| Total sleep time (min)                | 316 ± 68.6          | 163–444                |
| Sleep efficiency (%)                   | 80.6 ± 10.4         | 55–97                  |
| REM (%TST)                            | 14.5 ± 7.7          | 0–30                   |
| REM latency (min)                     | 112.5 ± 63.5        | 0–231                  |
| Obstructive AHI (n/h)                 | 4.1 ± 3.2           | 1.0–14.1               |
| Desaturation index (n/h)              | 9.8 ± 11.1          | 0.0–40.1               |
| Total arousal index (n/h)             | 11.7 ± 6.6          | 4.1–29.0               |
| Spo2, nadir (%)                        | 87 ± 4.6            | 79–94                  |
| Mean Spo2 (%)                          | 95 ± 1.8            | 91–97                  |
| S((mU/l)/min)I                        | 4.1 ± 4.8           | 0.9–22.2               |
| AIRg (mU/l) min                       | 1,003 ± 796         | 148–3,360              |
| DI (S× AIRg)I                         | 2,548 ± 1,759       | 537–8,328              |
| SG (× 1/102/min)                      | 0.019 ± 0.009       | 0.003–0.039            |
| Fasting glucose(mg/dl)                 | 84.7 ± 7.4          | 70.5–100.0             |
| Fasting insulin (μU/ml)               | 13.8 ± 8.7          | 2.0–39.5               |
| HOMA IR                               | 2.97 ± 2.06         | 0.40–9.51              |
| FGIR                                   | 9.63 ± 8.5          | 2.5–40.8               |
| QUICKI                                 | 0.15 ± 0.02         | 0.12–0.20              |

ahI, apnea hypopnea index; aIRg, acute insulin response; DI, disposition index; FGIR, fasting glucose/insulin ratio; HOMAIR, homeostasis model assessment–estimated insulin resistance; QUICKI, quantitative insulin sensitivity check index; REM, rapid eye movement; SG, glucose effectiveness; S, insulin sensitivity; Spo2, oxy-hemoglobin saturation; TST, total sleep time.

A crucial aim of the study was to use multiple linear regression to assess the impact of SRBD on glucose homeostasis independent of age and obesity. BMI and regional fat distribution (as measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA)) were chosen as measures to correct for adiposity. Because Tanner staging was not available in all patients, age (which strongly correlated with Tanner stage in the 16 subjects available, r = 0.57, P = 0.021, Spearman rank correlation) was used as a surrogate marker for pubertal stage. After correcting for age and adiposity (as measured by BMI z-score, DEXA percentage body fat and DEXA percentage trunk fat) using multiple linear regression, we found that some of the correlation coefficients that appeared significant in Table 2 were no longer statistically significant. However, the metabolic–sleep pairs with the strongest correlations remained significant. In particular, Log(DESAT) remained moderately correlated with Log(S) even after taking into account the confounding effects of age and BMI or fat distribution/amount measured by DEXA. Log(TAI) remained positively correlated with Log(fasting insulin). Log(TAI) also correlated with Log(HOMAIR) when DEXA, but not BMI.

Figure 1. Homeostasis model assessment–estimated insulin resistance (HOMA) negatively correlates with insulin sensitivity. Scatter plot shows significant negative correlation between the conventional static index of insulin resistance based on fasting serum measurements (HOMAIR) and insulin sensitivity (S), a parameter derived from the frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance test. Pearson correlation coefficient r = –0.78. ## SRBD and insulin sensitivity in teens

### Table 2. Pairwise correlations (r value) between key polysomnographic and metabolic parameters (before adjustment for age and adiposity)

|                                   | Total sleep time | Efficiency (%) | Log TAI | So2 nadir p | Log DESAT index | Log OAHI |
|-----------------------------------|------------------|----------------|---------|-------------|------------------|----------|
| Log SI                            | –0.11            | –0.15          | –0.42   | 0.443*      | –0.53*           | –0.29    |
| Log AIRg                          | 0.39             | 0.32           | 0.31    | –0.329      | 0.38             | 0.14     |
| Log DI                            | 0.37             | 0.23           | –0.10   | 0.10        | –0.14            | –0.16    |
| SG                                | 0.17             | 0.44*          | –0.10   | 0.160       | –0.28            | –0.060   |
| Log Fast Ins                      | 0.032            | –0.049         | 0.56**  | –0.325      | 0.38             | 0.23     |
| Log FGIR                          | –0.041           | 0.031          | –0.56** | 0.302       | –0.37            | –0.24    |
| Log HOMAIR                        | 0.024            | –0.065         | 0.55*   | –0.343      | 0.38             | 0.22     |

aIRg, acute insulin response; DeSaT, oxy-hemoglobin desaturation; DI, disposition index; Fast Ins, fasting insulin; FGIR, fasting glucose/insulin ratio; hOMaIR, homeostasis model assessment–estimated insulin resistance; OahI, obstructive apnea hypopnea index; SG, glucose effectiveness; S, insulin sensitivity; TaI, total arousal index.
*P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01.

### Table 3. Metabolic vs. sleep parameters after adjustment for age and adiposity

| Metabolic parameter | Sleep parameter | Adiposity measure | BMI z-score | % Body fat | Log (% trunk fat) |
|---------------------|----------------|-------------------|-------------|------------|--------------------|
| Log (S) I           | Log (DESAT)    |                   | –0.47* (0.022)* | –0.50* (0.043)* | –0.50* (0.036)* |
| Log (Fast Ins)      | Log (TAI)      |                   | 0.37 (0.097) | 0.55* (0.015)* | 0.54* (0.016)*   |
| Log (HOMAIR)        | Log (TAI)      |                   | 0.36 (0.11)  | 0.53* (0.019)* | 0.52 (0.020)*     |
| SG                  | Sleep efficiency|                   | 0.47 (0.040)* | 0.46 (0.044)* | 0.46 (0.041)*     |

Values in cells = standardized regression coefficient β (P value).
DeSaT, desaturation index; Fast Ins, fasting insulin; hOMaIR, homeostasis model assessment–estimated insulin resistance; SG, glucose effectiveness; S, insulin sensitivity; TaI, total arousal index.
*Statistically significant (P < 0.05).

z-score, was used to measure the degree of obesity. A somewhat unexpected finding was the correlation between sleep efficiency and glucose effectiveness (SG). Thus, sleep fragmentation and intermittent hypoxemia were found to be associated with metabolic impairment in this group of patients independent of age and adiposity.

This study evaluated the association between SRBD and the factors characterizing glucose–insulin metabolism in obese adolescent Latino males using the FSIVGTT. We found that intermittent hypoxemia correlates negatively with S. Sleep efficiency correlates positively with SG, the capacity of glucose to mediate its own disposal. We also found that the degree of sleep disruption as reflected by Log(TAI) was positively correlated with Log(HOMAIR) (a marker of insulin resistance based on fasting measurements). Furthermore, all of these associations were independent of age and adiposity.

The strength of our study centers on the use of the FSIVGTT to measure glucose metabolism, allowing simultaneous estimation of both insulin resistance and pancreatic β-cell action. By using the FSIVGTT to measure glucose metabolism, we identified in children a relationship between SRBD and pancreatic β-cell responsiveness as well as insulin sensitivity (disposition index), both of which are fundamental to understanding the pathophysiology leading to type 2 diabetes. The use of DEXA allowed us to more accurately quantify and adjust statistically for differences in adiposity among the subjects than would the use of BMI alone. Furthermore, by restricting the pool of subjects to only adolescent Latino males, we were able to minimize the potential confounding effects of gender, ethnicity, and age.

Our study found the frequency of oxygen desaturation episodes, defined as only a ≥3% drop in oxy-hemoglobin. | Fasting insulin (μU/ml) | Log(insulin sensitivity) |
|--------------------------|-------------------------|
| 10                       | 1.2                     |
|                          | 1.0                     |
|                          | 0.8                     |
|                          | 0.6                     |
|                          | 0.4                     |
|                          | 0.2                     |
|                          | 0.0                     |
|                          | −1.0                    |
|                          | −0.5                    |
|                          | 0.0                     |
|                          | 0.5                     |
|                          | 1.0                     |
|                          | 1.5                     |
|                          | 2.0                     |
|                          | 50                      |
|                          | 60                      |
|                          | 70                      |
|                          | 80                      |
|                          | 90                      |
|                          | 100                     |

Log (insulin sensitivity) was linearly and negatively correlated with Log (desaturation index), following adjustment in both independent and dependent variables for age and adiposity (BMI z-score, total percentage fat, and percentage trunk fat). For BMI z-score as the adiposity measure, β = –0.47 (P = 0.022).

Glucose effectiveness (SG) was linearly and positively correlated with sleep efficiency, following adjustment in both independent and dependent variables for age and adiposity (BMI z-score, total percentage body fat, and percentage trunk fat). For BMI z-score, β = 0.47 (P = 0.040).

A number of unique features and limitations of this study merit discussion. Because our study was cross-sectional, it is not possible to arrive at any definitive conclusions about causal mechanisms from our finding of an association between SI and intermittent hypoxemia. A longitudinal study involving data posttreatment might provide stronger support to our hypothesis. However, taken together with the findings from other studies, the mechanism by which SRBD contributes to insulin resistance most likely centers on intermittent episodes of oxygen desaturation, leading to alterations in key physiologic pathways. Hypoxia has been linked to disturbances in inflammatory pathways manifested by alterations in proinflammatory cytokines and abnormal transcription pathways that have been postulated to impact development of the metabolic syndrome. Furthermore, animal models have suggested that intermittent hypoxia leads to insulin resistance even in lean mice.

Sleep fragmentation correlates with increased fasting insulin levels. Log plot between fasting insulin and total arousal index (TAI) showing linear and positive correlation, independent of age and adiposity (total % body fat and trunk % fat). For total % body fat as the adiposity measure, β = 0.55 (P = 0.015).

An additional limitation of our study relates to the incomplete Tanner stage information of our subjects, which occurred due to some subjects’ preference to not participate in this portion of the exam. Although it is likely that the stage of puberty affected glucose–insulin dynamics, we found a strong correlation between age and Tanner stage in the subjects for whom we were able to obtain Tanner stage data. Thus, age can be viewed as a surrogate marker of pubertal development in our subjects. Even after adjusting for age and adiposity, sleep fragmentation and intermittent hypoxemia were found to be associated with metabolic impairment. Further longitudinal studies are indicated to explore how puberty effects the association between metabolic impairment and SRBD in obese children.

Another potential confounder of our results is the fact that the FSIVGTT and polysomnography components of the study were carried out separately for each subject. However, none of the subjects received therapy for SRBD or insulin. SRBD and insulin sensitivity in teens
=======================================

resistance in the time between the two parts of the research assayed in duplicate by using a two-site immunochemiluminometric protocol. Thus, the time spent between the two portions of the study seems unlikely to have impacted the results. To avoid potentially confounding effects of therapies, we chose to exclude diabetic patients and those on antihypertensive medications. This potentially excluded a clinically relevant segment of pediatric patients at high risk for incurring complications of obesity. However, the majority of patients referred to our sleep center are nondiabetic and do not use medications for hypertension. Finally, our initial statistical method applied pairwise correlations across a number of variables (Table 2), which may lead to errors in inference. The pairwise correlation was used to screen for potentially significant associations. Subsequently, we used multiple linear regression to determine the correlations upon which the conclusions are based.

In summary, sleep fragmentation and intermittent hypoxemia in obese adolescent Latino males is associated with impairment in insulin sensitivity and SG independent of age and adiposity. These findings are critical considering the high prevalence of obesity, SRBD, and metabolic impairment in children. It would be important to continue to explore whether treatment of SRBD at an early age (e.g., positive pressure therapy, weight loss) can improve metabolic function and decrease the potential comorbidities in obese children.

METHODS
-------

Subjects
Twenty-two obese (BMI ≥95th percentile for age/gender), Latino males 10–17 y old were recruited from patients referred to our center for snoring. Exclusion criteria included a history of lung disease other than mild asthma, type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension requiring the use of antihypertensive medications, or use of stimulant medications for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. In addition, subjects using positive airway pressure therapy or supplemental oxygen were excluded. The Children’s Hospital Los Angeles Institutional Review Board approved the study, and written informed consent/assent was obtained.

Measurement of Body Fat
Each subject’s weight to the nearest 0.1 kg was measured with a digital scale and height to the nearest centimeter was measured with a wall-mounted stadiometer. A physician determined Tanner pubertal stage on subjects who assented to the exam. BMI was calculated as weight/height², compared with standard reference values, and expressed as a percentile for age/gender and z-score based on the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention growth charts. Total body fat mass, trunk fat mass, percentage body fat, and percentage trunk fat were determined from DEXA using a Hologic QDR-4500 Delphi W (Hologic, Bedford, MA) scanner.

Indexes of Metabolic Function
After overnight fasting, subjects were tested in a general clinical research center with the standard FSIVGTT in the morning. Fasting glucose and insulin levels were expressed as the mean of two samples collected 15 and 5 min before time zero. At time zero, glucose (25% dextrose, 0.3 g/kg body weight) was administered intravenously over 1–2 min. At t = 20 min, insulin (0.02 U/kg body weight, Humulin Regular insulin; Eli Lilly, Indianapolis, IN) was injected. Blood samples were collected at: 2, 4, 8, 12, 16, 19, 22, 24, 26, 30, 35, 40, 50, 70, 100, 140, and 180 min and centrifuged (7 min, 3,500 rpm, 4 °C) to obtain plasma. Aliquots were frozen at –20 °C. Glucose was assayed using the glucose oxidase method (Vitros 5.1, Orthoclinical Diagnostics; Johnson and Johnson, Rochester, NY). Insulin was assayed in duplicate by using a two-site immunochemiluminometric protocol.

Standardized Regression Coefficient β
Multiple linear regression analysis provides a means to untangle the unique influence of each explanatory or independent variable on the outcome. The regression coefficients are a means to quantify the extent to which the different, albeit related, factors each uniquely contribute to the outcome. Due to the difference in units of each regression coefficient, they cannot be directly compared. However, by using standardized regression coefficients, which are unit-less, the analysis allows for comparison across different variables. relative strength of each explanatory variable on the outcome can be measured. The standardized regression coefficient βi for explanatory or independent variable xi is defined as β i x , SDi is the SD of(SD/SD), where bi = bi i y is the regression coefficient for i x , and SDy is the SDi of the outcome or dependent variable y.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the Children’s Hospital Los Angeles General Clinical Research Center for provision of staff and funding for this project. We also thank Richard Bergman, Michael Goran, and staff for providing MInMOD software and expertise for interpretation of the FSIVGTT. We also acknowledge the subjects and their families for participating in this project.

STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL SUPPORT
This work was supported in part by national Institutes of Health (nIH) grants HL090451 and EB001978; University of Southern California Center for Transdisciplinary Research on Energetics and Cancer grant TREC U54 CA 116848; and grant M01 RR00047 from Children’s Hospital Los Angeles General Clinical Research Center, with funds provided by the national Center for Research Resources, nIH. 