# NORMAL SLEEP PHYSIOLOGY

## Sleep Position and Sleep Stages: Evidence of Their Independence

Summary: Recently we conducted a first ontogenetic study of sleep positions in the human, which involved five groups of 10 subjects (5 males, 5 females) from each of the following age categories: 3-5 years, 8-12 years, 18-24 years, 35-45 years, 65-80 years. They slept for 4 consecutive nights in the laboratory. Sleep positions were recorded during 2 nights with super-8 time-lapse photography. In a first report we presented results showing developmental trends in sleep position shifts, position durations and in the use of prone, supine and side positions. In the current report we present results showing that there was no significant relationship between sleep stages and sleep positions in any group. Furthermore, time-series analyses revealed no consistent pattern of position sequences in any of the age groups. It is concluded that, while there are ontogenetic trends in sleep position preferences, sleep positions are independent of sleep stages and do not show consistent rhythmicity.
Key words: Sleep positions; postural activity; motor activity; sleep stages; ontogenesis

MOTOR ACTIVITY DURING SLEEP has always been of much interest in the study of sleep. PiÈron, who stated that sleep could be distinguished from wakefulness by an absence of activity, reinforced the importance of monitoring this dimension when studying sleep. Early in the century, the direct visual observation of the sleeping subject was the primary (and also the only) way of studying sleep. It was only in 1930 that Johnson and Wiegand introduced a method for the mechanical detection of movements during sleep, and observed a high frequency of changes in body position, with an average interval of 11.5 minutes between movements. Soon after the polygraphic discovery of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and the sleep cycle, the determination of any relationship between body motility, sleep stages, and sleep cycle became important.

In their study of the ontogenesis of sleep, Roffwarg et al reported that, except on certain occasions, non-REM (NREM) sleep could be considered as almost devoid of muscular activity. Muzet, Naitoh, Townsend and Johnson attempted to determine whether body movements during sleep could predict a change in the stages of sleep. They calculated the number of body movements during a period of 10 minutes of stage 2 preceding slow-wave or REM sleep, and 10 minutes of stage 2 succeeding these stages, and found that the presence or absence of movements during stage 2 could be used to predict the course of sleep. If there are movements, there is a low probability of a transition from stage 2 to slow-wave sleep (SWS) during the next 10 minutes; however, movements did not interfere with the transition from stage 2 to REM sleep. That difference could reflect the fundamental physiological differences between REM sleep and SWS. These results support the hypothesis that body movements, because of their activating effect, inhibit the entrance into SWS, and that the increase in movements before REM sleep could produce the stimulation required by the central nervous system for the initiation of REM sleep. Further evidence of a relation tionship between body motility and the sleep cycle comes from the work of Hobson et al. With time-lapse photography and through polysomnography, they found that the organization of motor activity is periodic and related to the electrophysiological cycles of sleep.

They observed that long periods of immobility (more than 30 minutes) occurred in the descending phases of each sleep cycle; ie, in the transition from stage 2 to stages 3 and 4 of the two first cycles of the night. Conversely, they observed that it is during the transitions from stages 3 and 4 to stage 2 and REM sleep that most position shifts appear. These findings were replicated by De Koninck and confirmed that motor activity is related to sleep cycles.

If body motility is related to sleep cycle and sleep stages, it would appear natural to expect that sleep positions would also be related to the electrophysiology of sleep. Compared to sleep motility, however, there have been very few studies devoted to sleep positions. Despite earlier observations that dorsal positions were related to poor subjective sleep quality, snoring, and sleep apnea, there has so far been no link reported between sleep positions and sleep stages.

In order to provide more comprehensive information on sleep positions and on their relationship to sleep electrophysiology, we recently recorded sleep positions and polysomnography in five age groups (3 to 5, 8 to 12, 18 to 24, 35 to 45, and 65 to 80 years old) and reported our findings on sleep positions. In brief, the results revealed a significant ontogenetic decrease in the number of position shifts, from 4.4 changes per hour to 4.7, 3.6, 2.7 and 2.1, respectively. There was a corresponding progressive increase in the duration of positions and in the number of periods of more than 30 minutes of postural immobility.

Although prone, supine, and side positions were used for an equal proportion of sleep time by young children, trend analyses revealed a significant progressive ontogenetic disappearance of prone positions and a progressive preference, very marked in the elderly, for right-side positions. We report here the results of our analyses of the sleep-position data in relationship with sleep electrophysiology.

## METHOD

### Subjects

Five groups, each comprising five males and five females, were studied:
1. children 3 to 5 years, M=3.9;
2. preadolescents 8 to 12 years, M=9.8;
3. young adults 18-24 years, M=22.5;
4. adults 35 to 45 years, M=39.5;
5. elderly 65 to 80 years, M=72.1.

During an interview, the subjects were given information about the research protocol. Only the candidates who met the following criteria were included in the study: self-declared right-handedness, normal weight, taking no medication, and with no present or past history of sleep disorders.

Electrophysiological Recordings

Electroencephalographic (EEG) activity was recorded at sites C3 and C4, according to the international 10-20 system using Grass-type gold-plated electrodes. To detect vertical and horizontal eye movements, an electro-occulogram was recorded with electrodes placed supraorbital to one eye and infraorbital to the other eye. An electromyogram was taken with the submental muscles.

Photographic Recordings

Positions were recorded with the method of De Koninck, using a super-8 camera incorporated with an intervalometer (NIZO 801) that allows it to take 3600 pictures on one cassette. The intervals were chosen according to the anticipated hours of sleep. For example, with an interval of 8 seconds between pictures, it is possible to record 8 consecutive hours on one film. The camera was placed in front of a window outside the room, approximately 4.6 meters from the bed. The exposure time of each film frame was the same as the interval, which permits the use of a 7-watt lamp on the ceiling of the room to get a clear picture. In order to coordinate the electrophysiological and photographic measures, a clock synchronized with a polygraph time marker was placed on the wall above the bed such that it appeared on the film.

Analysis of Electrophysiologic and Photographic Data

The analysis of the electrophysiologic data of the night was done according to the criteria established by Rechschaffen and Kales. The analysis of the body positions was done with a special projector (Lafayette analyzer) which permits visualization of the film frame by frame. Sleep positions were analyzed along four dimensions (the position of the head, trunk, arms and legs), each containing four categories. For each position observed, the time corresponding to the beginning of the adoption of that position as indicated by the clock just above the bed, the time indicating the end of the position, the total duration of the position, the code of the category for each of the dimensions, the number of movements occurring while in that position (movements when subjects resume the same position that is with no change in any category—for example, when a subject scratches his nose), and the corresponding electrophysiological stages of sleep were recorded. Scoring reliability of the polygraphic and film data was maintained. Table 1. Mean scores (SD) on electrophysiological measures in five age groups

| GROUPS                     | I (3 - 5 years) | II (8 - 12 years) | III (18 - 24 years) | IV (35 - 45 years) | V (65 - 80 years) |
|----------------------------|------------------|--------------------|----------------------|---------------------|--------------------|
| Total sleep time           | 561.3 (45.2)     | 505.5 (39.9)       | 418.8 (50.7)         | 402.4 (23.2)        | 383.9 (67.5)       |
| Latency to stage 1 (min)   | 9.7 (3.5)        | 10.0 (7.2)         | 17.3 (13.5)          | 10.8 (6.8)          | 15.7 (9.7)         |
| Latency to stage 2 (min)   | 16.1 (6.6)       | 17.2 (9.0)         | 24.9 (17.4)          | 16.6 (10.5)         | 31.5 (11.5)        |
| Latency to REM (min)       | 158.6 (52.6)     | 133.0 (24.8)       | 93.1 (20.8)          | 82.7 (31.5)         | 83.6 (25.3)        |
| Sleep efficiency (%)        | 96.7 (2.0)       | 97.4 (2.5)         | 98.4 (2.3)           | 93.1 (5.0)          | 87.8 (9.9)         |
| % of wake                  | 4.9 (2.3)        | 3.8 (3.1)          | 5.4 (5.0)            | 9.2 (5.4)           | 14.5 (9.7)         |
| % of stage 1               | 4.4 (4.3)        | 5.5 (2.5)          | 4.8 (2.0)            | 4.8 (2.0)           | 20.2 (6.9)         |
| % of stage 2               | 7.1 (6.5)        | 48.0 (11.4)        | 35.0 (11.7)          | 39.4 (4.5)          | 50.3 (7.0)         |
| % of stage 3               | 24.1 (7.0)       | 11.2 (7.1)         | 28.4 (17.6)          | 17.8 (4.1)          | 5.9 (4.8)          |
| % of stage 4               | 23.0 (3.3)       | 14.6 (6.1)         | 11.6 (4.8)           | 11.0 (4.1)          | 1.9 (4.8)          |
| % of REM                   | 21.4 (5.1)       | 19.8 (3.2)         | 18.0 (7.0)           | 26.9 (4.5)          | 20.8 (4.5)         |

established by the independent scoring of two judges. For each epoch and category, more than 80% agreement was achieved. In addition, half the records were scored by a third independent judge. For each sleep stage and for trunk positions, more than 90% agreement was achieved on overall night scorings.

RESULTS
Electrophysiological Analysis of Sleep

The electrophysiological characteristics of sleep of the five groups of subjects were analyzed in order to detect any disparity from previous studies and also to corroborate the ontogenetic evolution of sleep cycles described. The main sleep characteristics are presented in Table 1. Analyses of variance revealed significant differences between the groups for time spent in all stages of (stage 1: F=27.68, df=4,49, p<.001; stage 2: F=13.44, p<.001; stage 3: F=9.31, p <.001; stage 4: F=29.93, p<.001; REM sleep: F=4.45, p<.005). Trend analyses showed significant linear trends corresponding to decreases in total sleep time (F=92.36, df=4,45, p<.001), increases of stages 1 (F=56.03, p<.001) and 2 (F=18.6, p<.001) with age, and a decrease in the amount of stage 4 with age (F=109.3, and p<.001). Decreases in the occurrence of stage 3 and REM sleep with age was not confirmed, since the trend analysis was only significant at the curvilinear level (respectively F=18.6, df=4,45, p<.002 and F=8.6, p<.001).

Sleep Stages and Body Positions

The main interest of this analysis was the distribution of postural dimensions and their categories across the stages of sleep. The percentage of total sleep time spent in each of the four categories of the four postural dimensions during each stage of sleep (96 variables) was compiled for the experimental nights. Repeated-measures analyses of variance on the 96 variables of the 2 nights revealed only one significant difference (arms straight). Therefore, as in our previous report, the data for the 2 nights were combined for the subsequent analysis. Analysis of variance confirmed that every postural dimension and category was equally represented in each stage of sleep. A separate analysis within each age group confirmed that there was no postural dimension differently represented by any sleep stage. Figure 1 illustrates for each group as well as all groups combined the distribution of the percentage of sleep time spent in each trunk dimension for three stage combinations: 1 and 2, 3 and 4, and REM. It would follow from these findings that the developmental trends that we observed in the overall distribution of trunk sleep positions for the entire night should also be present for each stage. Analyses of variance revealed significant differences between groups for all stages, and significant linear trends for stages 1, 2, 3, and REM sleep. More specifically, the ontogenetic decrease in prone positions was significant during stage 1, 2, 3, and REM (F=10.4, df=4, 49, p<.0072; F=17.65, p<.001; F=9.83, p<.002; F=11.48, p<.001). In addition, the increase in time spent on the right side was significant for stages 1, 2, 3 and REM sleep (respectively, F=11.19, p<.001; F=34.74, p<.001; F=9.55, p<.002; F=19.45, p<.0001). While these trends were not significant during stage 4, there was a significant linear decrease in dorsal positions (F=27.13, p<.001), which was also significant for stage 3 (F=8.39 , p<.004). There were a few higher-order quadratic and cubic trends that reached p<.05, but none reached the .01 level that we required after applying a correction for multiple tests. Figure 1. Distribution, for each age group, of the percentage of sleep time spent in stages 1 and 2, 3, and 4 and REM sleep in each trunk position dimension

SLEEP, Vol. 21, No. 4, 1998

| Sleep Stage | Percentage of Sleep Time |
|-------------|-------------------------|
| Stages 1 and 2 |                       |
| Stage 3     |                         |
| Stage 4     |                         |
| REM Sleep   |                         | Periodicity of Positions

While sleep positions may be independent of sleep stages and sleep cycle, they may have their own periodicity. In order to explore this possibility, we conducted time-series analyses. The time spent in each of the four trunk-position categories during each 10-minute bin of each night was calculated. The data for all subjects was analyzed separately and combined for nights 3 and 4. Autocorrelation coefficients for the first 45 bins (7 hours and 30 minutes) were performed for each group. While some autocorrelation coefficients reached significance when using the single method of Makridakis, Wheelwright, and Mcgee (with 45 lags, an r of .29 at any lag is significant at .05), they were not consistent across the 2 nights and in some cases were present for the combined data but not for any of the 2 nights separately. Finally, autocorrelations for each night for each subject did not show any consistent pattern.

The results of the time-series analyses reveal that periodicities in trunk positions can indeed be present during single nights, but do not appear to be consistent across nights and across subjects in any age groups. Combined with the observation made in our earlier report that the sleep position taken at sleep onset is independent of the preferred position taken later on during sleep, our findings suggest that sleep positions have determinants that are outside of waking position preferences, sleep characteristics, and periodicity. It does not rule out their relationship with sleep quality and their importance in sleep apneas and in medical conditions such as chronic pain, where further research is required. Finally, while the lack of time-of-night effect observed in our earlier report would tend to rule out a core-body-temperature influence on sleep position preferences, the methodology used—with pajamas and bed sheets and no direct recording of temperature—leaves this area unexplored.

Sleep Electrophysiology

When comparing our five age groups, we have observed a linear increase with age in the percentage of wake time, stage 1, and stage 2 (except in the children). Conversely, there was an ontogenetic decrease in slow-wave sleep and in REM sleep. It should be noted, however, that our adults (35 to 45 years) had a high percentage of REM sleep. It is possible that these subjects (the majority of whom are university professors) had a higher percentage of REM sleep because of their high level of cognitive activity.

In general, then, these results corroborate the observations of Roffwarg et al and Zepelin on the ontogenetic evolution in the electrophysiological characteristics of sleep. However, our results suggest that the decrease of REM sleep in older subjects is less drastic than that reported by Roffwarg et al.

Relation Between Sleep Positions and Sleep Stages

It is clear that, within each stage, a similar ontogenetic evolution in sleep positions emerges which corroborates the trends observed across the entire night. The decrease with age in prone positions and the increase in right-side positions were present in all but stage 4, and were particularly clear within stage 2 and REM. The absence of a statistically significant trend in stage 4 could be due to the very small amount of this stage in the elderly. The above observations confirm the independence of sleep stages from sleep positions. The selection of particular postures is thus not related to mechanisms underlying sleep architecture. In our earlier report, we speculated that the decrease in sleep positions is not related to mechanisms underlying sleep architecture. SLEEP, Vol. 21, No. 4, 1998

Sleep position and sleep stages - Lorrain and De Koninck 