# Feasibility and Emotional Impact of Experimentally Extending Sleep in Short-Sleeping Adolescents

## Study Objectives
Published experimental sleep manipulation protocols for adolescents have been limited to the summer, limiting causal conclusions about how short sleep affects them on school nights, when they are most likely to restrict their sleep. This study assesses the feasibility and emotional impact of a school-night sleep manipulation protocol to test the effects of lengthening sleep in habitually short-sleeping adolescents.

## Methods
High school students aged 14–18 years who habitually slept 5–7 hours on school nights participated in a 5-week experimental sleep manipulation protocol. Participants completed a baseline week followed in randomized counterbalanced order by two experimental conditions lasting 2 weeks each: prescribed habitual sleep (HAB; sleep time set to match baseline) and sleep extension (EXT; 1.5-hour increase in time in bed from HAB). All sleep was obtained at home, monitored with actigraphy. Data on adherence, protocol acceptability, mood and behavior were collected at the end of each condition.

## Results
Seventy-six adolescents enrolled in the study, with 54 retained through all 5 weeks. Compared to HAB, during EXT, participants averaged an additional 72.6 minutes/night of sleep (p < .001) and had reduced symptoms of sleepiness, anger, vigor, fatigue, and confusion (p < .05). The large majority of parents (98%) and adolescents (100%) said they would “maybe” or “definitely” recommend the study to another family.

## Conclusions
An experimental, school-night sleep manipulation protocol can be feasibly implemented which directly tests the potential protective effects of lengthening sleep. Many short-sleeping adolescents would benefit emotionally from sleeping longer, supporting public health efforts to promote adolescent sleep on school nights.

## Statement of Significance
Short sleep is common in adolescents, especially on school nights. However, ethical concerns about school-year sleep restriction have limited experimental studies of adolescents to the summer, when conditions are very different from the school year. This demonstration of an ethically sound, school-year-based sleep manipulation protocol is a launching point for further experimental evaluation of the potential protective effects of lengthening sleep in short-sleeping adolescents. Despite perceptions that such adolescents need less sleep, our results suggest that short-sleeping adolescents experience an emotional benefit from increasing their sleep duration on school nights. Given that the large majority of adolescents sleep less than what is recommended on school nights, findings support calls for public health efforts to promote adolescent sleep.

## Keywords
Sleep Extension, School Year, Mood, Behavior, Adolescents, Experimental.

## INTRODUCTION
It is well documented that bedtimes shift later during adolescence, likely due to a combination of biological (eg, circadian phase delay), behavioral (eg, evening use of electronics, bedtime autonomy), and social (eg, extracurricular activities, homework) factors. On nonschool nights (eg, weekends, vacations), this is often accompanied by later rise times in the morning; however, early school start times during the school year prevent such “sleeping in,” resulting in habitually short sleep for many adolescents. Nearly half of high school students in the United States sleep 5 to 7 hours on school nights, well below the clinical recommendations of 8–10 hours per night. Large epidemiological studies of adolescents have indicated that obtaining less sleep than is recommended is predictive of poor academic functioning, worse mood, and increased suicidal ideation and attempts.

Consistent with correlational findings, experimental studies conducted during the summer months have demonstrated that impairment in attention, mood, and learning begins to manifest after just one to two nights at a similar level of sleep restriction (ie, 5–6.5 hours per night) compared to healthier sleep (ie, ~9 hours of sleep per night). Based on this prior work, it is assumed that chronically short-sleeping adolescents experience impaired emotional and behavioral functioning during the school day and, subsequently, would benefit from longer sleep. However, prior multinight experimental sleep manipulation studies in adolescents have occurred exclusively during the summer months, have involved only a few days in each condition, and/or occurred in laboratory settings. Although gathering data during the summer mitigates ethical concerns regarding potential harms of experimental sleep restriction (eg, on school performance), the school year can involve drastically different sleep, eating, activity, and social patterns, raising questions about the generalizability of findings. The day-to-day life of an adolescent is significantly different during the school year, and it is possible that the schedules and stressors unique to this period could have a distinct impact on sleep and its associated outcomes such as diet, physical activity, attention, learning, and mood. The potential interaction of these factors are largely unaccounted for when generalizing findings from experimental sleep manipulations occurring during the summer. Such generalizability concerns are even greater for studies conducted in artificial (eg, lab-based) settings that fundamentally differ from adolescents’ daily lives. Further, summertime sleep-restriction protocols do not directly test whether extending the sleep of habitually short sleepers on school nights improves outcomes, which is a fundamental premise of many public health efforts. Finally, protocols that last only a few days may limit sensitivity to the cumulative effects of habitually short sleep or, conversely, whether adolescents “adapt” over longer periods. To address concerns with existing experimental sleep protocols, the primary aims of the present study were to test the feasibility, adherence, and acceptability (to participants) of an unprecedented school year, home-based sleep manipulation protocol that focuses on sleep extension in habitually short-sleeping adolescents. As a secondary aim and to illustrate the potential scientific yield of such a protocol, we tested the effects of lengthening the sleep of these youth on mood, sleepiness, and attention, hypothesizing that extending sleep would improve these variables, even in healthy (but short-sleeping) adolescents.

## METHOD
All study procedures were approved and overseen by the Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center Institutional Review Board.

### Participants
Seventy-six healthy high school students (38% male) aged 14–18 years who routinely slept 5 to 7 hours on school nights were recruited from community flyers, online advertisements, and emails sent within a large regional children’s hospital. Exclusion criteria included parent report of a psychiatric or neurological disorder, use of medication known to affect sleep, habitual sleep less than 5 hours or greater than 7 hours on school nights, symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea or restless leg syndrome, body mass index (BMI) > 30, inflexible obligations (eg, employment) that require bedtime later than 10:00 pm on school nights, or daily consumption of more than one coffee or energy drink or more than two caffeinated sodas. Prior to enrollment, each teen’s school calendar and schedule were checked to ensure that no participation occurred during the first (transition) or final (exam) week of a semester nor during a multiday school vacation, all of which could distort sleep.

### Procedures
Families interested in participating were screened via phone and, if eligible, were verbally consented and mailed actigraph wristwatches with baseline condition instructions. Eligibility was confirmed at the initial office visit with questionnaires and objective measures (eg, height/weight measurements, inspection of baseline actigraphy to confirm habitual short sleep), and written parental consent and adolescent assent were completed.

Throughout, adolescents slept in their normal home setting, monitored with nightly sleep diaries and objective actigraphy. The initial Baseline Sleep Condition included five school nights.

| Week 1 nights | Week 2 nights | Week 3 nights | Week 4 nights | Week 5 nights |
|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|
| Weekend       | Sleep Extension| Weekend       | Sleep Extension| Weekend       | Prescribed Habitual Sleep | Weekend | Prescribed Habitual Sleep |
| Baseline Week | Weekend       | Prescribed Habitual Sleep | Weekend | Prescribed Habitual Sleep | Office Visit | Office Visit | Office Visit |

Figure 1—School year sleep extension protocol (within-person, randomized crossover design). Table 1—Behavioral Strategies Used to Increase Adherence to the Extended Sleep Condition

| Behavioral Strategy          | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Securing motivation           | Prior to the manipulation, staff discussed study challenges, giving the adolescent the opportunity to opt out and asking if they want to move forward. Once the adolescent verbalized the desire to move forward, staff aligned with the adolescent and parent around the common mission of success with the protocol. This shared mission was then revisited in the extended sleep condition. |
| Goal setting                  | Adolescents were instructed to increase their time in bed by 1.5 hours relative to their baseline sleep duration. Specific bedtime and wake time goals were set to achieve this increase.                                                                 |
| Preplanning                   | Staff preplanned with the adolescent/parent dyad how to best adhere to the set sleep schedule and duration given the adolescent’s unique schedule, demands, and circumstances. This involved reviewing typical schedules and trying to identify sources of inconsistency in those schedules that could affect adherence. |
| Problem solving               | Barriers to achieving adherence were identified with adolescents and parents. Staff worked with families to help identify strategies to overcome barriers and ways in which adolescents could prioritize and reorganize activities to allow for an earlier bedtime. |
| Positive routine              | Healthy routines leading up to bedtime were encouraged, including reducing screen time and completing typical before bed activities (eg, showering, brushing teeth) before the set bedtime.                                      |
| Sleep hygiene                 | Adolescents were instructed to limit caffeine during the day to one coffee, one energy drink, or two caffeinated sodas per day with encouragement to avoid caffeine altogether. They were also instructed to eliminate screen time at bedtime and to turn off cell phones, set them to “airplane mode,” or keep them outside of their bedrooms. |
| Self-monitoring               | Adolescents completed daily sleep diaries. Each day they were also instructed to call into the research lab to report what time they went to bed and what time they woke up in the morning. They were also aware that the diaries would be reviewed with them and their parent alongside actigraphy data during office visits. |
| Positive reinforcement         | When conducting sleep reviews, researchers positively reinforced adolescents for adhering to prior sleep instructions. Further, parents were encouraged to support and positively reinforce their adolescent for adherence to the set sleep schedule. |

On weekends, adolescents could choose their bedtime but were asked to awaken no more than an hour later than on school nights. This was intended to offer teens some control over their schedules while minimizing large shifts in sleep phase due to “sleeping in” which is common for adolescents on nonschool nights.

Adolescents were compensated for participation in the study with $50 for attending the baseline office visit, $100 for attending the second office visit after the first experimental condition (after week 3), and $100 for attending the final office visit after the second experimental condition (after week 5) for a total of $250. Compensation was tied to visit attendance but not specifically to sleep protocol adherence. A subset of participants (46%) were given the opportunity to earn an additional $20 for completing an outcome unrelated to the present study.

Measures
Background Information
During the baseline visit, demographic information and adolescent medical history were obtained from parents. Adolescent height and weight was objectively measured to calculate BMI and confirm eligibility.

Sleep Monitoring (Adherence Measure)
Sleep was monitored every night by objective actigraphy (SleepWatch©; Ambulatory Monitoring Incorporated, Ardsley, NJ), accompanied by nightly sleep diaries. Diaries and actigraphy data were reviewed together during the conjoint session with the parent/adolescent dyad to promote adherence, identify potential artifacts on actigraphy (eg, inadvertent removal), and clarify bedtimes and rise times. Once screened for artifacts, actigraphy has been shown to have greater than 90% concordance with electroencephalogram-defined sleep parameters. Validated algorithms then determined sleep onset, offset, sleep period duration (offset minus onset), and efficiency (percent of the period between sleep onset and offset spent in actigraphy-scored sleep).

Protocol Satisfaction (Acceptability Measure)
During the final office visit, parents and adolescents who completed all 5 weeks of the study independently completed a study debriefing form that included questions inquiring about challenges, supports, and satisfaction with the study protocol. Item content is detailed in the Results section, below. Parents and adolescents rated challenges related to the length of the protocol (ie, 5 weeks) and extending usual sleep schedules during the extended sleep condition on a four-point scale (0 = not hard or challenging to 3 = very hard or challenging). They rated the helpfulness of supports such as involving a parent in problem-solving sleep scheduling and being provided written instructions for the sleep schedule during each condition on a four-point scale (0 = not helpful to 3 = very helpful). Finally, satisfaction was assessed by a question inquiring about likeliness of recommending the study to other families rated on a three-point scale (0 = no, 1 = maybe, 2 = definitely). Mood and Behavior
==================

The Profile of Mood States (POMS) was completed by adolescents at the end of each condition. The POMS is a well-validated measure which includes 65 items asking teens to rate their mood and behavior (eg., sad, angry, uneasy) across the past several days on a five-point scale (0 = not at all to 4 = extremely). Mood was compared across the HAB and EXT conditions for the following six subscales: Tension-Anxiety (9 items; range 0–36), Depression-Dejection (15 items; range 0–60), Anger-Hostility (12 items; range 0–48), Vigor-Activity (8 items; range 0–32), Confusion-Bewilderment (7 items; range 0–28), and Fatigue-Inertia (7 items; range 0–28). Higher scores indicate greater endorsement of adverse symptoms, with the exception of Vigor-Activity, for which high scores reflect positive feelings. All but Depression-Dejection have been shown to be sensitive to summertime experimental sleep restriction in adolescents.

Inattention and sleepiness during each condition were assessed by complementary parent- and self-report behavioral questionnaires developed in previous research for use in adolescent experimental sleep manipulation protocols. The inattention scale was derived from a short-form measure based on items from the Vanderbilt Assessment Scale, and the sleepiness scale was based on items from the Child Sleep Habits Questionnaire, both of which are well-validated measures. Adolescents and parents responded to questions on a four-point scale (1 = never to 4 = very often). The inattention scale consists of nine items with scores ranging from 9 to 36, and the sleepiness scales consist of five items with scores ranging from 5 to 20. Higher scores indicate greater inattention or sleepiness. The parent- and adolescent-report inattention and sleepiness measures have been validated in our previous work and found to be sensitive to summertime experimental sleep restriction in adolescents.

Analysis Plan
==============

The primary aim of this study focused on retention, adherence, and protocol acceptability to participants. Retention was defined by arrival at all three study visits across the 5-week protocol. The difference in average sleep period between experimental conditions was examined as a measure of adherence. Although we examined rates of nonadherence (<30 minutes longer sleep period per school night during the EXT versus HAB sleep condition), we conservatively included all retained participants in intent-to-treat analyses. Chi-square and independent-sample tests compared those who completed the study to those who were dropped or lost to attrition on baseline demographic and sleep variables. Adolescent and parent satisfaction with the protocol was evaluated descriptively for all participants completing the study via responses to the post-study debriefing questionnaire, and differences in responding between adolescents and parents were examined using McNemar’s test.

The secondary aim assessed the sleep, mood, and behavioral effect of the manipulation. Preliminary analyses tested for manipulation “drift” across the 2 weeks within each experimental condition (ie, change in sleep from the first to second week) via paired-sample t tests on actigraphy data. Actigraphy data for weekdays were then pooled within each condition and compared across baseline.

Participant Characteristics, Flow, and Retention
=================================================

Of the 76 adolescents who enrolled in the study, eight were excluded/dropped before randomization (two due to nonadherence to the baseline actigraphy protocol, two due to BMI ineligibility, and four withdrew without explanation), and 14 withdrew after randomization, yielding an overall 71% retention rate. Of the 14 who withdrew after randomization, seven withdrew during EXT and seven during HAB. More specifically, five were randomized to EXT first and withdrew during this condition within days without explanation. Nine were randomized to HAB first, six of whom withdrew during this condition without explanation, one withdrew due to illness, and two withdrew after completing HAB (one before starting EXT due to an overnight work shift and one without explanation after starting EXT).

Figure 2 shows the distribution of adherence levels (ie, difference in nightly sleep duration between HAB and EXT) for retained participants. As can be seen, 50 of the 54 retained adolescents (93%) met our definition of adherence to the sleep manipulation protocol. Those who were nonadherent were evenly split between males and females and all identified as European American. Notably, there were also 12 participants who exceeded the 90-minute.

```
| Between Condition Sleep Difference (mins) |
|-------------------------------------------|
| <30                                       |
| 30 - 45                                   |
| 45 - 60                                   |
| 60 - 90                                   |
| 90 - 120                                  |
| 120                                       |
```

Distribution of the difference in nightly sleep duration across the habitual and extended sleep conditions. Participants were instructed to extend their sleep by 90 minutes during the extended condition. sleep extension during EXT. The cause for this variation in adherence (both below and above the instructed amount) is unknown. As shown in Table 2, there were no significant differences in baseline demographic or sleep characteristics across those who completed the study versus those who were dropped or lost to attrition.

Sleep Manipulation Feasibility and Satisfaction As shown in Figure 3, within each experimental condition (eg, week 1 vs. week 2 of HAB) there were no significant differences in sleep offset time or sleep period (p > .05). The change in sleep onset time across the 2 weeks during the HAB condition was statistically significant but at less than 10 minutes was of questionable practical significance (9.6 minutes later on week 2, p = .047), and no such week-to-week difference was evident within the EXT condition. Overall, these data show minimal to negligible “drift” in sleep variables across the 2 weeks within each experimental condition. Table 3 compares actigraphy indexes across the baseline, HAB, and EXT conditions, pooling weekday data across the 2 weeks within the HAB and EXT condition. Overall, there were significant effects in sleep onset time and sleep period, p < .001, but not sleep offset time, p > .05. Follow-up tests showed that, while the HAB condition was similar to the baseline condition, youth averaged 14.4 minutes less sleep during HAB compared to baseline sleep, p = .04. This unexpected difference may have been due to more stable sleep patterns due to the prescribed sleep schedule during the experimental conditions (ie, HAB and EXT) than during the less structured baseline. When sleep variability (calculated as the individual-level standard deviation of sleep duration in minutes across weekdays within a condition) was compared across conditions, there were significant differences, F(2, 48) = 3.92, p = .027, with greater variability during baseline (M = 51.26, standard deviation (SD) = 37.50) compared to both HAB (M = 36.40, SD = 19.94) and EXT (M = 37.36, SD = 26.14). As expected, youth averaged 73 minutes longer sleep during EXT compared to HAB, p < .001, due to participants going to bed significantly earlier during EXT, p < .001. There was only a slight change in sleep efficiency, with youth experiencing less than a 1.5% decline in efficiency during EXT compared to baseline, p = .02. There were no differences in sleep efficiency between HAB and EXT. Short-sleeping adolescents in this study were able to extend their sleep period by nearly 1¼ hours on average with minimal change in objective sleep quality. The order in which experimental conditions were experienced was not a significant

Table 2—Demographic and Baseline Sleep Parameters With Comparison Between Participants Dropped or Lost to Attrition and those Completing the Protocol.

| Demographics                                  | Dropped/withdrew (n = 22)a | Study completers (n = 54) | F or χ2 | df | p    |
|-----------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|---------------------------|---------|----|------|
| Age                                           | 16.3 ± 0.86                 | 15.9 ± 1.1                | 2.47    | (1, 73) | .121 |
| Female gender                                 | 14 (66.7%)                  | 33 (61.1%)                | 0.199   | 1  | .655 |
| Race                                         |                             |                           | 0.418   | 3  | .936 |
| - White                                      | 16 (76.2%)                  | 40 (74.1%)                |         |    |      |
| - Black                                      | 4 (19.0%)                   | 10 (18.5%)                |         |    |      |
| - Asian American                             | 0 (0%)                       | 1 (1.9%)                  |         |    |      |
| - Biracial                                   | 1 (4.8%)                    | 3 (5.6%)                  |         |    |      |
| Caregiver education                           |                             |                           | 12.34   | 7  | .09  |
| - Less than high school                      | 2 (9.5%)                    | 0 (0%)                    |         |    |      |
| - High school or GED                         | 1 (4.8%)                    | 2 (3.8%)                  |         |    |      |
| - Some college                               | 2 (9.5%)                    | 1 (1.9%)                  |         |    |      |
| - Associates degree                          | 1 (4.8%)                    | 9 (17.0%)                 |         |    |      |
| - Bachelor’s degree                          | 11 (52.4%)                  | 19 (35.8%)                |         |    |      |
| - Master’s degree                            | 3 (14.3%)                   | 15 (28.3%)                |         |    |      |
| - Professional degree                        | 0 (0%)                       | 2 (3.8%)                  |         |    |      |
| Baseline actigraphy data                     |                             |                           |         |    |      |
| - Onset—time                                 | 11:55 ± 0:59                | 0:04 ± 0:49               | 0.35    | (1, 68) | .559 |
| - Offset—time                                | 6:10 ± 0:26                 | 6:28 ± 0:57               | 1.83    | (1, 68) | .181 |
| - Sleep duration—hours                       | 6.2 ± 0.93                  | 6.4 ± 0.68                | 0.71    | (1, 68) | .403 |
| - Efficiency                                  | 95.3% ± 4.1%                | 95.2% ± 4.1%              | 0.02    | (1, 68) | .899 |

aTotal dropped/withdrew sample included 22 participants; however, one participant did not provide complete demographic data and three did not have valid actigraphy data. factor for any of the sleep outcome variables; thus, no carryover effects were observed. Finally, sleep parameters during the four weekends (ie, pre-HAB, mid-HAB, pre-EXT, and mid-EXT) were contrasted to determine whether the sleep manipulation during school nights had any effect on sleep during weekends; no differences were found for onset, offset, duration, or sleep efficiency (see Supplemental Table 1).

Table 4 summarizes questions related to adolescent- and parent-perceived feasibility and satisfaction and comparisons between adolescent and parent responses. Adolescents generally reported the EXT condition to be more challenging and support to be less helpful than did parents. Despite success of the EXT protocol, many teens (52%) and some parents (28%) indicated that it was “moderately” or “very” challenging to set aside more time in bed for 2 weeks during the extended sleep condition. Otherwise, only a minority of those who completed the study reported challenges due to study length or logistics. Results additionally indicate that extending sleep improved most (adolescent-reported) POMS subscales, including Anger-Hostility (p = .013), Vigor-Activity (p = .014), Fatigue-Inertia (p < .001), and Confusion-Bewilderment (p < .001). Significant differences were not found between the HAB and EXT conditions for POMS Tension-Anxiety or Depression-Dejection nor for either parent or adolescent report of inattention (p > .05 for all). However, parents did report greater inattention during HAB compared to the baseline week. There were no carryover (order-related) effects for any of the emotional and behavioral outcomes.

| Objective sleep parameters | Baseline (BL) | Habitual (HAB) | Extended (EXT) | F | p | Post hoc comparisons* |
|---------------------------|---------------|----------------|----------------|---|---|----------------------|
| Onset (time)              | 0:00 ± 0:06   | 0:05 ± 0:06    | 22:58 ± 0:06   | 109.36 | <.001 | BL, HAB > EXT |
| Offset (time)             | 6:24 ± 0:05   | 6:16 ± 0:06    | 6:20 ± 0:06    | 1.04 | .356 | Not significant |
| Sleep period (hours)      | 6.40 ± 0.08   | 6.16 ± 0.08    | 7.37 ± 0.08    | 86.49 | <.001 | HAB < BL < EXT |
| Efficiency (%)            | 95.3 ± 0.55   | 95.1 ± 0.58    | 93.9 ± 0.58    | 4.03 | .021 | BL > EXT |

*Post hoc comparisons derived using paired-samples t tests with Tukey’s correction for pairwise comparison. Conditions listed together (eg, “BL, HAB”) did not significantly differ in those post hoc tests.

Although challenging, it is feasible to run a multiweek EXT protocol with short-sleeping adolescents during the school year while incorporating an experimental, crossover design to allow for causal inference. Despite potential barriers (eg, study length, inability to change school start times), there was adequate retention of participants throughout the study and no evidence of differential attrition. The nearly three-fourth of initial participants who completed the study were similar to those who did not complete it in terms of age; sex; race/ethnicity; family income; parent education; and habitual sleep onset, offset, and efficiency on school nights. Further, those who completed the protocol reported high satisfaction with the study, noting money compensation and written instructions as especially helpful. Participants still recognized challenges, particularly related to increasing time in bed for a 2-week period during the Table 4—End-of-Study Adolescent- and Parent-Report of Perceived Feasibility and Satisfaction With Sleep Extension Protocol

“Moderately” or “Very” hard responses

| How challenging/hard was…                                                                 | Parent         | Adolescent     | pa    |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|----------------|-------|
| …setting aside 3 Friday afternoons?                                                       | 9 (17%)        | 6 (11%)        | .549  |
| …being in the study for 5 weeks in a row?                                               | 7 (13%)        | 15 (28%)       | .115  |
| …wearing the activity monitors/watches?                                                   | 5 (9%)         | 10 (19%)       | .388  |
| …completing the sleep diary?                                                              | 6 (11%)        | 11 (20%)       | .267  |
| …keeping the usual sleep schedule during the first week?                                  | 4 (8%)         | 5 (9%)         | 1.0   |
| …keeping the usual sleep schedule later for 2 weeks in a row?                            | 12 (22%)       | 11 (20%)       | 1.0   |
| …setting aside more time in bed for 2 weeks in a row?                                   | 15 (28%)       | 28 (52%)       | .015  |

“Moderately” or “Very” helpful responses

| How helpful was…                                                                          | Parent         | Adolescent     |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|----------------|
| …after-school/afternoon scheduling?                                                       | 51 (94%)       | 40 (74%)       |
| …problem-solving changes in sleep schedule?                                               | 41 (76%)       | 28 (52%)       |
| …having a parent involved in sleep scheduling?                                            | 45 (83%)       | 33 (61%)       |
| …having written instructions for the activity monitors/watches?                           | 52 (96%)       | 43 (80%)       |
| …having written instructions for the sleep schedule?                                      | 53 (98%)       | 46 (85%)       |
| …money compensation?                                                                      | 53 (98%)       | 51 (95%)       |
| Would you recommend this study to other families?                                         |                |                |
| No                                                                                        | 1 (2%)         | 0 (0%)         |
| Maybe                                                                                     | 12 (22%)       | 18 (34%)       |
| Definitely                                                                                | 41 (76%)       | 35 (66%)       |

baP-value associated with a McNemar test examining the difference in endorsement of each response between parents and adolescents.
cMcNemar test only estimated for “maybe” versus “definitely” responses due to 0% endorsement of “no” by adolescents.
One adolescent skipped this question without explanation; percentages are based on the remaining sample.

school year. However, of those who withdrew from the study after randomization, there were no differences in withdrawal when participants were asked to go to bed earlier compared to when instructed to maintain their habitual schedule. Moreover, many of the study withdrawals occurred before adolescents had much experience with either experimental sleep condition. Prior experimental sleep manipulation studies in adolescents have focused on the summer to avoid ethical concerns around sleep restriction during the school year. Some authors have mitigated those concerns for school-year protocols by allowing participants and parents to self-select the timing of changes in sleep. That approach assumes that participants and parents can fully anticipate and mitigate risks (an untested assumption, as parents/participants may misjudge the impact on learning or a teacher may give an unexpected exam) and lacks the hallmark randomization of experiments that can conclusively demonstrate cause and effect. Instead, the current study mitigated ethical concerns by focusing on EXT in habitually short-sleeping adolescents. By targeting the adolescents most exposed to short sleep and by using an experimental protocol that shifted them toward accepted sleep recommendations, we ethically tested cause-effect relationships, in realistic circumstances, on previous correlational findings that short sleep in adolescents may have harmful effects on their attention and mood. Past experimental work has shown that shortening sleep during the summer causes sleepiness and worsened mood. Although informative, these studies occur at a time when schedules are different and life stressors are often fewer, calling into question the generalizability of findings to the potentially more demanding school months which account for a vast majority of a given year for an adolescent. This study was the first to experimentally show that lengthening sleep on school nights can improve feelings of sleepiness, anger, vigor, confusion, and fatigue. Further, although prior adolescent sleep manipulations maximized gaps between sleep conditions by using fixed sleep schedules across participants, by recruiting habitually short-sleeping adolescents, and experimentally extending their sleep, the current study allowed for more confident, directional conclusions that obtaining more sleep, relative to each teen’s baseline, results in more positive mood and behavior outcomes. Notably, our findings suggest that even “sub-optimal” sleep changes may have benefits. Even in the extended sleep condition, average sleep duration fell more than 30 minutes short of recommendations, and sleep onset was still relatively late (nearly 11:00 pm). Considering adolescence is a developmental phase when short sleep is highly prevalent, particularly on school nights, implications for promoting healthier sleep in teens are broad. Table 5—Comparison of Mood and Behavior Scores (Least Squares Means ± Standard Error) Across Conditions for Adherent Participants.

| Condition        | Baseline (BL) | Habitual (HAB) | Extended (EXT) | F     | p      | Post hoc comparisons*         |
|------------------|---------------|----------------|----------------|-------|--------|-------------------------------|
| Parent report     |               |                |                |       |        |                               |
| Inattention       | 11.9 ± 0.5    | 13.2 ± 0.5     | 12.8 ± 0.5     | 5.13  | .007   | BL < HAB                      |
|                   |               |                |                |       |        | BL = EXT                      |
|                   |               |                |                |       |        | HAB = EXT                     |
| Sleepiness        | 7.5 ± 0.4     | 9.0 ± 0.4      | 7.6 ± 0.4      | 8.54  | <.001  | BL, EXT < HAB                 |
| Self-report       |               |                |                |       |        |                               |
| Inattention       | 14.8 ± 0.5    | 15.1 ± 0.5     | 14.2 ± 0.5     | 2.32  | .101   | N/A                           |
| Sleepiness        | 10.4 ± 0.4    | 10.9 ± 0.4     | 9.4 ± 0.4      | 9.24  | <.001  | BL, HAB > EXT                 |
| POMS (self-report) |               |                |                |       |        |                               |
| Tension-Anxiety   | 9.0 ± 0.8     | 9.1 ± 0.8      | 8.0 ± 0.8      | 2.33  | .102   | N/A                           |
| Depression-Dejection | 7.4 ± 1.2  | 8.2 ± 1.3      | 6.9 ± 1.3      | 1.29  | .279   | N/A                           |
| Anger-Hostility   | 8.0 ± 1.1     | 9.3 ± 1.1      | 7.3 ± 1.2      | 4.24  | .017   | BL = HAB                      |
|                   |               |                |                |       |        | BL = EXT                      |
|                   |               |                |                |       |        | HAB > EXT                     |
| Vigor-Activity    | 13.6 ± 0.7    | 13.1 ± 0.7     | 14.7 ± 0.7     | 4.21  | .017   | BL = HAB                      |
|                   |               |                |                |       |        | BL = EXT                      |
|                   |               |                |                |       |        | HAB < EXT                     |
| Confusion-Bewilderment | 7.5 ± 4.5 | 7.8 ± 0.6      | 5.9 ± 0.6      | 10.04 | <.001  | BL, HAB > EXT                 |
| Fatigue-Inertia   | 8.8 ± 0.7     | 9.1 ± 0.7      | 5.8 ± 0.7      | 15.79 | <.001  | BL, HAB > EXT                 |

*Post hoc comparisons derived using paired-samples t-tests with Tukey’s correction for pairwise comparison. Conditions listed together (eg, “BL, HAB”) did not significantly differ in those post hoc tests.
POMS = Profile of Mood States.

In addition to changes in biological regulatory processes (eg, circadian phase delay), several factors contribute to short sleep during adolescence. Caffeine consumption, media use, social interactions, evening activities, increased autonomy, and early school start times have all been shown to impact sleep duration and quality in adolescents. Increased autonomy, particularly in regard to bedtime decisions, may also contribute to short sleep for teens. A quarter of parents report having no sleep-related rules (eg, caffeine use, screen time) for their adolescents, with 43% indicating that they have no rules specifically regarding bedtime. Research suggests that parental involvement in bedtime and earlier parent-set bedtimes are associated with longer sleep for adolescents in addition to less depressive symptoms, suicidal ideation, and daytime fatigue. Despite the public perception that many short-sleeping adolescents simply cannot go to bed earlier, or have reduced sleep need, our results suggest that many teens who regularly obtain less sleep can sustain earlier school-night bedtimes for at least two consecutive weeks and benefit from doing so. Interestingly, supports in the present study that were acknowledged to be among the most helpful included some that promote independence (eg, written instructions) while acknowledging the potential impact of parents (eg, parent involvement in sleep scheduling). The most universally endorsed support, financial compensation, suggests that it may be particularly important to change the reward contingencies to successfully shift bedtimes, though it is worth noting that compensation in the current study was tied to attending study visits and not directly tied to adherence to sleep schedules.

Limitations and Future Directions
Although results from this protocol are promising, several limitations should be noted. First, while bedtimes appeared malleable in this protocol, rise times were not. Participants anecdotally reported that they already woke as late as school start times allow. As a result, present findings do not speak to whether changes in rise time, which would necessitate later school start times, would have equivalent effects. We have previously found that an “early to bed” approach to experimental EXT has health benefits for “morning larks” but may not for “night owls.” This lends indirect support for advocates of later high school start times. Our results suggest that an average increase of 1.3 hours in sleep duration during the school year significantly improves mood and daytime fatigue but cannot address if it matters whether that sleep occurs via earlier bedtimes versus later rise times. To do so, one might test a rise-time manipulation during the summer months (albeit with residual questions about the generalizability to the school year) or during the school year in a context where school start times are relatively late (though an “early rise” condition in that case might introduce ethics concerns). The habitual sleep experimental condition was based off of adolescents’ typical schedules measured during baseline; however, sleep duration was on average 14 minutes less during HAB. than it was during baseline. This unintentional decrease in the amount of sleep obtained is likely attributable to the more stable schedule kept during HAB and may have accentuated differences in mood and behavior found between the two experimental conditions. This is particularly true for constructs that were significantly different between HAB and EXT but not between baseline and HAB (ie, anger-hostility and vigor-activity).

To allow some control over their weekend sleep schedule while avoiding large shifts in sleep phase, we allowed adolescents to choose their weekend bedtime but asked them to awaken no more than an hour later than on school nights. Considering adolescents often “sleep-in” by several hours on weekends, it is likely that these instructions changed participants’ habitual weekend sleep schedule. However, because baseline weekend sleep data were not collected we were unable to compare sleep during experimental condition weekends against pre-randomization habitual weekend sleep. Recent experimental data suggests that two days of weekend recovery sleep may not be sufficient to return to baseline on measures of attention and self-reported sleepiness; however, it is unknown what impact potentially shortening habitual sleep on weekends would have long-term. Future studies should consider collecting baseline data for an entire week (as opposed to just during weeknights) so that differences in sleep on weekends can be examined. Further, researchers should consider the potential benefits of allowing typical weekend “catch-up” sleep at the risk of shifting circadian phase during experimental conditions.

Although participant retention was adequate, many adolescents prematurely withdrew from the study, most without explanation, perhaps reflecting the challenges associated with a prolonged study period and the need for adolescents to stabilize their habitual sleep schedules or increase their time in bed on school nights. There were no demographic or baseline sleep differences between those who dropped and those who completed all 5 weeks of the study, but it is possible that study completers differ on some other unmeasured construct which could impact the generalizability of results. Related to participant withdrawal, it should be noted that protocol satisfaction was only obtained at the end of the study. Thus, only those who completed all five weeks, regardless of adherence, provided feedback on acceptability. This could inflate satisfaction estimates. Recognizing the challenges associated with obtaining feedback from participants who prematurely withdraw, we recommend that future studies aim to measure acceptability at the time of dropout.

It would be helpful to replicate this study in other samples and to extend findings on the impact of EXT. Most of our mood and behavior outcomes were self-report, and it would be important to replicate findings using multiple raters and/or condition-blind observers. Further, both correlational and experimental EXT studies have demonstrated relationships between short sleep and a variety of outcomes beyond mood and sleepiness. Further research is needed to determine if findings are similar for other physical, emotional, behavioral, learning, and safety outcomes in teens. Finally, the 5-week protocol, including a 2-week period of EXT, is a strength over prior experimental studies with shorter sleep manipulation periods. However, it is still unknown if short-sleeping adolescents would be able to sustain this improvement in sleep or if emotional and behavioral improvements would persist over time. Future research should examine the longer term impact and sustainability of improvements in sleep duration and related outcomes for short-sleeping adolescents.

CONCLUSIONS
Despite study challenges and potential limitations, results suggest that it is feasible to experimentally extend sleep during the school year for habitually short-sleeping teens, and that by doing so, mood and sleepiness are significantly improved. These findings confirm that many adolescents who obtain less sleep than is recommended would in fact benefit from lengthening their sleep. Further, this protocol paves the way for the study of a host of other potential sleep-related outcomes during the period when adolescents are most exposed to chronic sleep restriction: the school year. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary material is available at SLEEP online.

SUBMISSION & CORRESPONDENCE INFORMATION
Submitted for publication February, 2017
Submitted in final revised form June, 2017
Accepted for publication July, 2017
Address correspondence to: Tori R. Van Dyk, PhD, Division of Behavioral Medicine and Clinical Psychology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, MLC 3015, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.
Telephone: (513) 803–8393; Fax: (513) 636-0084; Email: tori.vandyk@cchmc.org

AUTHOR NOTE
All work for the present study was performed at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center.

DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
Financial support was provided through the Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Research Foundation and the State of Ohio Emergency Medical Services grant #134987. Both provided administrative funding oversight, but otherwise was not involved in the design and conduct of the study; collection, management, analysis, or interpretation of the data; preparation, review or approval of the manuscript; nor decision to submit the manuscript for publication. None of the authors has a significant conflict of interest to report. 