# Abstract
## Study Objectives
This study investigates the impact of sleep deprivation (SD) on task-goal switching, a key component of cognitive flexibility.

## Methods
Task-goal switching performance was tested after one night of regular sleep (n = 17 participants) or of total SD (n = 18). To understand the relationships between task-switching performance and other cognitive processes following SD, participants were tested for other key attentional (alertness and vigilance) and executive (inhibition and working memory) functions. Spontaneous eye blink rate (EBR) was also measured as an indirect marker of striatal dopaminergic function.

## Results
SD negatively affects task-goal switching as well as attentional and inhibition measures, but not working memory. Changes in task-goal switching performance were not significantly correlated with changes in objective and subjective markers of fatigue and sleepiness, response inhibition, or spontaneous EBR.

## Conclusions
Altogether, our results show differentiated effects of SD on key executive functions such as working memory, inhibition, and task-goal switching.

# Statement of Significance
This study is the first to evidence impact of sleep deprivation on task-goal switching, a key component of cognitive flexibility and cognitive control. Moreover, alterations in task-goal switching were not associated with changes in spontaneous eye blink rate as well as attentional and executive functions. These results are of significance because sleep debt is more and more present in modern society, and cognitive flexibility subtends rapid adaptation to constantly changing situations or environments, a condition usually encountered in everyday life.

# Key words
sleep deprivation; task switching; cognitive flexibility; cognitive control; dopamine; eye blink # Introduction

Cognitive control (also called executive functions or executive control) refers to the mental ability to regulate thoughts and actions in accordance with internally represented goals. Cognitive control allows individuals to define a goal, choose a strategy to achieve it, and monitor its execution. Specifically, cognitive control enables an adaptation to novel situations when overlearned routines are insufficient. Cognitive flexibility is a crucial component of cognitive control that subtends rapid adaptation to constantly changing situations or environments, a condition usually encountered in everyday life.

Cognitive flexibility is usually investigated in laboratory conditions using task-switching paradigms in which participants repeatedly switch between two tasks or more. For instance, participants can be presented with colored shapes and instructed to decide between colors (red vs. blue) or shapes (circle vs. square) according to a cue presented previously. Switching between tasks leads to more errors and increased processing time compared with performing the same task. The additional time to respond (or higher error rate) in a shifting task condition is called a switch cost. It is usually computed by subtracting the mean reaction time (or error rate) for repeated conditions from the reaction time (or error rate) for switch conditions.

Importantly, task switching in itself is not a unitary process. It is rather a complex mechanism that involves several components. Imagine you are photocopying different documents. Some of them are printed double-sided but the others are single-sided and need to be printed onto a single sheet of paper. In addition, consider that the documents are mixed in a fixed order, which you cannot change (i.e., you cannot photocopy the double-sided documents first and then the others), meaning you have to switch between conditions. Succeeding in this situation needs at least two distinct sets of operations. First, for each document, you have to keep in mind whether you are photocopying a double-sided document. In the task-switching literature, this stage has been labeled “task-goal activation.” Second, you have to program the settings of the photocopier to a “duplex printing” or a “convert to duplex printing” mode, according to the task goal. This stage has been labeled “task-rule activation” and requires retrieving the rules that allow achieving the goal in long-term memory.

Besides S–R mappings, the type of cues indicating the task to perform is another element that influences task-rule switching. Depending on its nature, the cue itself can represent an additional rule to learn. A cue can be strong (i.e., transparent, e.g., the word “color” used to signal a color judgment task) or weak (i.e., arbitrary, e.g., a triangle indicates the color task and a diamond indicates the shape task). Weak cues increase the involvement of task-rule activation because the information provided by the cue is not sufficient in itself to define the task to perform, and participants must retrieve the meaning of the cue (i.e., the rule) in long-term memory in addition to the main task. Therefore, the use of transparent cues also emphasizes task-goal activation and decreases the impact of task-rules. As expected, arbitrary (weak) cues give rise to higher switch costs than transparent (strong) ones.

The functional dissociation between task-goal and task-rule switching has been evidenced using functional neuroimaging and latent factor analyses. Task-goal and task-rule switching have been shown to rely on distinct neural processes and substrates. Event-related potentials studies identified an early parietal and frontal positivity associated with task-goal activation, and late parietal positivity and frontal negativity associated with task-rule activation. Functional magnetic resonance imaging studies also found that left anterior regions are differentially involved in task-goal and task-rule representations with the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) involved in abstract rules representation, the presupplementary motor area (pre-SMA) involved in rules suppression, and the inferior frontal junction (IFJ) involved in task-goal representation. Posterior regions [i.e., the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) and the intraparietal sulcus (IPS)] are more involved in S–R rules and response-sets representations. In a recent study using latent factor analyses, 20 task pairs were administered to 119 young adults to assess five proposed components of mental set shifting. Task-goal switching was labeled Judgment shifting and required participants to switch between varying classification tasks. For example, participants had to determine either the color or the shape of objects presented. Task-rule switching was labeled mapping shifting, and participants had to switch between S–R mappings. Three other components, which we will not manipulate in this study, were also assessed, namely, dimension shifting, response set shifting, and stimulus set shifting. Modeling latent factors for each of the components revealed that a model with five separate yet correlated factors fits the data best. Importantly, task-goal switching was more consistently associated with a separate factor than task-rule switching and could not fully be accounted for by a general shifting factor, confirming the importance of dissociating these two stages.

Sleep deprivation (SD) is well known to exert a deleterious impact on various cognitive domains, but only a few studies investigated its impact on cognitive flexibility. These studies found an increased switch cost after a night of total SD. However, several executive functions were mixed in one study (i.e., response inhibition, task switching, and task strategy), which results in difficult comparisons and interpretations. The three other studies used task-switching paradigms that involved arbitrary S–R mapping (e.g., left button for red or circle shape). Therefore, increased SD-related switch costs reported in prior studies might be due to (or aggravated by) SD-related impairments in memory load capacities eventually hampering cognitive flexibility. In addition, weak cues were used in all SD studies on task switching also increasing the memory load. In sum, these studies arguably evidenced task-rule switching deficits after SD. However, it remains disputable whether task-goal switching in itself is impaired after SD, or if higher switch costs after SD are the consequence of SD-related difficulties to switch the rules during task performance.

In this framework, the present study investigates the impact of one night of total SD on cognitive flexibility using a task-goal switching paradigm with nonarbitrary mapping and strong (transparent) cue conditions that minimize task-rule cognitive load. We predicted that SD would aggravate switch costs, indicating a task-goal switching alteration. We also predicted a spontaneous EBR increase after SD. However, as noted above, this increase might not be associated with the task-goal switching alteration. Importantly, many studies have provided evidence for a deleterious impact of SD on alertness, vigilance, WM, and other mental abilities. In this respect, SD-related impairments in cognitive flexibility might be an indirect consequence of the deterioration of these other cognitive functions. Therefore, we tested participants for other key attentional (alertness and vigilance) and executive (inhibition and WM) functions. ### Material and Methods

#### Participants
Thirty-eight French-speaking participants gave their written informed consent to participate in this study approved by the Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Psychological Sciences at the Université libre de Bruxelles (ULB). Data for three of them were discarded due to a technical failure during the switching task. The remaining 35 participants (19 females) had a mean age of 21.94 ± 2.52 years old (range = 18–26 years). All participants were right-handed, had no history of medical, neurological, or psychiatric disorders, were free of any medication or drug, and without depression signs (13-item Beck Depression Inventory; score range = 0–5; cutoff score = 8). Participants’ chronotype was neutral (n = 29), moderate evening (n = 4), or moderate morning (n = 2) types according to the Morningness–Eveningness Questionnaire (score range = 35–63). Habitual fatigue level was below the cutoff score on the Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS; score range = 1.33–5.11; cutoff score = 5.5). There were four smokers in the SD group and two smokers in the RS group. All smokers smoked less than 10 cigarettes per day. Participants were required to maintain a RS-wake cycle for 3 days prior to the study (i.e., sleep at least 7 hours per night, go to bed before 01:00 am, wake up before 10.30 am, and no naps during the day). Compliance was controlled using actigraphic recordings (ActiGraph wGT3X-BT Monitor, Pensacola, FL). Participants were also asked to complete the St. Mary Hospital questionnaire and a sleep diary after each night of sleep.

#### Procedure
Participants were assigned to one out of two conditions. They either slept at home between the evening and morning testing sessions (RS; 17 participants) or stayed awake in the laboratory during the entire night (SD; 18 participants). For organizational reasons, participants knew before the testing session in which condition they were included. No difference was found between the two groups for all the above-mentioned inclusion criteria (two-tailed t-tests for independent samples; all p-values >.26), except for a trend [t(33) = −2.01; p = .052] on habitual fatigue levels (FSS scores), on average higher in the SD (3.21 ± 1.01) than in the RS (2.56 ± 0.91) group. However, all scores remained below cutoff pathological values.

As illustrated in Figure 1, both SD and RS groups were first tested in the evening starting at 18:00. Participants completed the following tasks, always in the same order: psychomotor vigilance task (PVT), subjective sleepiness (Karolinska Sleepiness Scale, KSS; Visual Analogue Scales for Sleepiness, VAS-S) and fatigue (Visual Analogue Scales for Fatigue, VAS-F) scales, WM (N-back), and response inhibition (Stop-signal) executive tasks. At 19:00, spontaneous EBRs were recorded for 3 minutes followed by the task-switching protocol. Afterward, the RS group went home for a regular night of sleep, whereas the SD group stayed in the testing room during the whole night under the constant supervision of two experimenters. During the SD period, participants were asked to remain quiet and seated most of the time. They were allowed to engage in calm activities (e.g., reading, playing society games, and watching movies). Water was available ad libitum, and isocaloric meals were offered hourly. Participants had to refrain from stimulant drinks (e.g., coffee, tea, or energizers) or smoking. The PVT and the KSS were administered hourly to document changes in objective and subjective vigilance levels, respectively, over the night. At 09:00 am, the second testing session started with the exact same protocol administered on the previous evening. Participants assigned to the RS group came to the laboratory in the morning at 09:00 for the second testing session.

#### Fatigue, Sleepiness, Alertness and Vigilance, and EBR
At the beginning of each session, participants’ subjective level of sleepiness and fatigue were assessed using the KSS and VAS-F/S.

Objective measures of alertness and vigilance were obtained using the 10-minute version of the PVT. In the PVT, participants were instructed to press a key as fast as possible whenever a millisecond countdown appeared in the middle of a computer screen. Stimuli were randomly presented with an inter-stimuli interval ranging from 2 to 10 seconds. Alertness or PVT speed was estimated using the median reaction times (RTs), less affected by extreme values than the mean.

| Evening session | Morning session |
|------------------|-----------------|
| KSS              | KSS             |
| VAS-FIS         | VAS-FIS         |
| N-back           | N-back          |
| Stop Signal      | Stop Signal     |
| Task switching    | Task switching   |
| EBR              | EBR             |
| PVT              | PVT             |
| 18:00            | 9:00            |
| RS group         | RS group        |
| Sleep at home    | Hourly administration of KSS, VAS FIS and PVT + isocaloric lunch |
| SD group         | SD group        |
| Hourly administration of KSS, VAS FIS and PVT + isocaloric lunch | Quiet activities |

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the experimental protocol (evening, night, and morning sessions). KSS = Karolinska Sleepiness Scale; VAS-F/S = Visual Analogue Scales for Fatigue/Sleepiness; PVT = Psychomotor Vigilance Task; RS = regular Sleep; SD = sleep deprivation; EBR = spontaneous eye blink rate recording. PVT variability as a marker of vigilance was measured using the RTs’ coefficient of variation, i.e., standard deviation divided by mean. To record spontaneous EBR, participants were seated in a separate room 1 m away from a wall with a fixation cross at the level of the eyes. They were instructed to relax, sit comfortably, and fixate the cross on the wall. They were allowed to move slightly and to blink but not to turn their head to the right or left. This information helped diverting participants’ attention from their blinks. Eye movements and blinks were video-recorded for 3 minutes. Participants were seated in front of the fixation cross during the instructions, and the first 10 seconds of recording were not analyzed to allow for adaptation to the environment. Video-recordings were visually inspected a posteriori to count the number of eye blinks. A blink was defined as a rapid closing and opening of the eyelid: slow eye closures were not counted as blinks. Two independent evaluators counted the EBR, and results were compared. In case of disagreement, the video was recounted for a third time and an agreement decided. Spontaneous EBR was computed as the mean EBR per minute during each recording session and was entered in statistical analyses like in prior studies.

Task-Goal Switching
Task-goal switching was assessed using a cued match-to-sample task from our lab. The task design is illustrated in Figure 2. At the beginning of each trial, an instruction cue was displayed in the center of the screen for 250 milliseconds, followed by a short (0 milliseconds) or a long (1800 milliseconds) cue-stimulus interval (CSI). Participants had to then match the stimulus presented in the upper part of the screen with one of the two stimuli presented in the lower part of the screen according to the instruction cue. Responses were always spatially congruent to the target location, i.e., left key for left answer and right key for right answer. The task-switching protocol was programmed using Psyscope X software and run on Mac Mini computers. Participants answered on the computer’s keyboard using their right and left hand forefingers. RT was recorded for each trial as the time elapsed from target onset to response (in milliseconds). The cue was a written word of the relevant dimension (in French): COULEUR (color), FORME (shape), NOMBRE (number), or CONTOUR (outline). For each trial, the three stimuli were presented on a black screen, each within a rectangle.

WM and Inhibition Tasks
WM N-Back Task
The WM N-back task was adapted from a previous study from our lab. In the 0-back (N0) condition, they had to press the response key only when the digit « 2 » appeared on the screen, i.e., a simple detection task. In the 2-back (N2) condition, they had to press the space bar when the digit currently displayed matched the digit presented two steps earlier in the sequence. Therefore, the task required for successful comparison both the maintenance and the updating of a series of items in WM. Participants performed five blocks of each condition with alternation of 0- and 2-back conditions. RTs and corrected accuracy scores (hits minus false detections) were averaged over the five blocks per session for the N2 and N0 conditions. WM performance reflecting the updating process (i.e., difference between N2 and N0 conditions) was computed on corrected accuracy scores (WM accuracy = accuracy N0 – accuracy N2) and on mean RTs for correct responses (WM speed = RT N2 – RT N0). Lower scores reflect smaller differences between N2 and N0 conditions, indicating a better performance in the WM updating process.

Inhibition Stop Signal Task
The Stop Signal task evaluating response inhibition abilities was adapted from a previous study from our lab. Participants were presented with arrows pointing to the left or to the right (go signals) at random intervals. They were instructed to answer as quickly and as accurately as possible to which side the arrow was pointing by pressing the corresponding key. In 20% of the trials, a stop signal (vertical arrow) was displayed shortly after the horizontal arrow. In this case, participants were instructed to try not responding, i.e., inhibiting the initiated response.

Figure 2. Cued match-to-sample switching task. For each trial, a fixation cross is followed by an instruction cue (“shape,” “color,” “number,” or “outline”), after which three figures are presented. Participants are asked to decide which one of the two lower figures matches the top one, depending on the instruction cue, and to press the corresponding key (left key for left figure and right key for right figure). 6 | SLEEPJ, 2018, Vol. 41, No. 2

(visual angle = 8.58°) and 5 cm tall (4.77°)] in a triangular dis- position, with the target picture on the top (Figure 2). The geo- metrical figures were 2.5 cm wide (2.39°) and 1.5 cm tall (1.43°). The distance between the screen and the participants’ eyes was approximately 60 cm.

Prior to the task, participants received written instruc- tions that were repeated by the investigator before the session started. They were instructed to press a key (“q” for left and “m” for right on an azerty keyboard) corresponding to the position (left or right, respectively) of the bottom picture that matched the target (top picture) according to the cued dimension. A sample trial figure was included as an example. The participants were instructed to perform as fast as possible while minimizing the number of errors. Each trial began with a fixation cross displayed at the center of the screen during 450 milliseconds, followed by the cue presented for 250 milliseconds. Short and long CSI conditions were presented in a counterbalanced order across participants. Beside warm-up trials, each CSI condition comprised two blocks of 96 trials (with 48 switch and 48 repeat trials in each block). Repeat and switch trials were presented in a pseudo-randomized order controlling for transitions between dimensions and congruency effects. Each trial involved two dimensions that differ (e.g., shape and color) and two dimensions that were kept constant (e.g., number and outline). Trials were all incongruent ones (i.e., each dimension was associated with a different response) so that it was always possible to know whether the participant responded correctly according to the target dimension. Incongruency was, thus, kept constant during the entire task. The order of the dimensions was pseudo-randomized to control for transitions and to ensure an equal number of presentations for each dimension. In the short CSI (0 milliseconds) condition, the cue was directly followed by the target and the two potential matching figures until a response was provided. In the long CSI (1800 milliseconds) condition, a black screen followed the cue during 500 milliseconds was then replaced by a point in the center of the screen for 250 milliseconds. The black screen–point sequence was repeated twice, followed by another black screen for 300 milliseconds before the presentation of the target and the two potential matching figures. The intertrial interval was set to 300 milliseconds in the long CSI condition and to 2100 milliseconds in the short CSI condition to balance the total time for each trial. Both short and long CSIs were preceded by a training block of 10 trials and administered within a single session that lasted approximately 30 minutes, with a short break between each interval type.

Task-goal switching analyses are based on the percentage of errors (task-switching accuracy) and on mean RTs for trials with correct responses only (task-switching speed). Both measures are complementary and necessary to assess a potential task-switching modulation. The first three trials in each block were considered as warm-up trials and excluded from the analyses. Trials immediately following an error were also discarded from the analyses (9% of trials). RTs’ outliers were identified for each participant, each CSI duration (short vs. long), and each task-switching condition (repeat vs. switch trials) using the generalized extreme studentized deviate (GESD) test. This procedure led to discard 3.4% of trials.

Data Analyses
Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation, unless mentioned otherwise. Significance level was set at p < .05.

Results
Sleep Prior to the Experiment
Mean sleep duration during Nights 1 to 3 preceding the experimental night averaged, respectively, 428 ± 59, 428 ± 57, and 474 ± 69 minutes in the RS group and 429 ± 74, 433 ± 71, and 444 ± 61 minutes in the SD group. A mixed-design ANOVA computed on sleep duration with between-subject factor Group (RS vs. SD) and within-subject factor Night (1 to 3) disclosed a main effect of Night [F(2,66) = 3.317, p = .042, ηp = .091]. Participants in both groups tended to sleep more during night 3 than during nights 1 (p = .065) and 2 (p = .098), without any significant difference between nights 1 and 2 (p = .982). The main effect of
Sleepiness, Fatigue, Alertness, and Vigilance
Figure 3 presents the results and post hoc comparisons for the
KSS, VAS-S, VAS-F, and PVT. Means and standard deviations are
presented in Supplementary Table S1. Interactions were signifi-
cant for all variables (all ps < .001; see Supplementary Table S2).

| KSS | VAS-S | VAS-F |
|-----|-------|-------|
|     |       |       |
| Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning |
| RS group | SD group | RS group | SD group | RS group | SD group |

| PVT speed (ms) | PVT variability | EBR min |
|----------------|-----------------|---------|
|                |                 |         |
| Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning |
| RS group | SD group | RS group | SD group | RS group | SD group |

| SSRT (ms) | WM speed (ms) | WM accuracy (%) |
|-----------|---------------|-----------------|
|           |               |                 |
| Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning |
| RS group | SD group | RS group | SD group | RS group | SD group |

| Accuracy switch-cost (%) | Latency switch-cost (ms) |
|--------------------------|---------------------------|
|                          |                           |
| Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning | Evening | Morning |
| RS group | SD group | RS group | SD group |

Figure 3. Results for KSS, VAS-S, and VAS-F scores, PVT speed and variability, N-back task, Stop signal task, EBR, and task-goal switching for both groups (RS, SD) and both sessions (evening, morning). RS = regular sleep group; SD = sleep deprivation group; KSS = Karolinska Sleepiness Scale; VAS-F/S = Visual Analogue Scales for Fatigue/Sleepiness; PVT = Psychomotor Vigilance Task; PVT speed = PVT median of RTs; PVT variability = PVT coefficient of variation of RTs; EBR/minute = spontaneous eye blink rate per minute; WM (working memory N-Back) speed = RT N2 – RT N0; WM accuracy = accuracy N0 – accuracy N2; SSRT = Stop Signal Reaction Time; Accuracy and Latency switch costs = switch trials – repeat trials. *p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001. Post hoc tests showed that scores were similar in RS and SD groups in the evening, but significantly differed in the morning with the SD group being more sleepy, more fatigued, and exhibiting decreased alertness and vigilance.

### Task-Goal Switching
For task-goal switching accuracy, the mixed-design ANOVA computed on percentages of errors disclosed main effects of Group [F(1,33) = 6.97, p = .013, ηp² = .174], Session [F(1,33) = 7.49, p = .01, ηp² = .185], CSI Duration [F(1,33) = 10.45, p = .003, ηp² = .241], and Task Switching [F(1,33) = 51.37, p < .001, ηp² = .609], as well as Group × Session [F(1,33) = 20.61, p < .001, ηp² = .384], Group × Task Switching [F(1,33) = 5.77, p = .022, ηp² = .149], Group × Session × Task Switching [F(1,33) = 6.55, p = .015, ηp² = .166], and Group × Session × CSI Duration [F(1,33) = 5.79, p = .022, ηp² = .149] interaction effects. No other interaction reached significance (all p-values >.328). Planned comparisons for the Group x Session x Task Switching interaction indicated that accuracy switch-cost scores were significantly higher in the SD group than in the RS group in the morning (p = .005) but not in the evening (p = .689). The mixed-design ANOVA computed on WM speed disclosed a main effect of Session [F(1,33) = 7, p = .012, ηp² = .175], with participants being faster in WM in the morning than in the evening. Group and Group × Session interaction effects failed to reach significance (all p-values >.174).

### WM N-Back Task
Figure 3 presents the results and post hoc comparisons for WM speed and accuracy. Means and standard deviations are presented in Supplementary Table S3. The mixed-design ANOVA disclosed a main effect of Group [F(1,33) = 6.06, p = .019, ηp² = .155], with RS participants exhibiting a higher accuracy than the SD group. Session and Group × Session interaction effects failed to reach significance (all p-values >.258). Furthermore, accuracy switch-cost scores increased in the SD group in the morning compared with the evening (p = .041). Figure 3 presents accuracy switch-cost scores for both groups and both sessions. Figure 4 presents accuracy scores for repeat and switch trials, for both groups, both sessions, and both CSI durations. Supplementary Table S4 presents RTs and switch-cost scores for both groups, both sessions, and both CSI durations.

### Inhibition Stop Signal Task
Figure 3 presents the results and post hoc comparisons for the Stop Signal task. Means and standard deviations are presented in Supplementary Table S3. The mixed-design ANOVA computed on SSRT disclosed a main effect of Group [F(1,33) = 6.22, p = .018, ηp² = .158] and a significant Group × Session interaction [F(1,33) = 17.23, p < .001, ηp² = .343]. The Session effect was not significant [F(1,33) = .69, p = .412, ηp² = .02]. Post hoc comparisons indicated that, in the SD group, SSRT increased in the morning compared with the evening (p = .006). SSRT in the evening and morning sessions did not differ significantly from those in the RS group (p = .115). SSRT was significantly higher in the SD group than in the RS group in the morning (p < .001) but not in the evening (p = .996).

### Spontaneous EBR
Figure 3 presents the results and post hoc comparisons for spontaneous EBR. Means and standard deviations are presented in Supplementary Table S3. The mixed-design ANOVA computed on mean EBR disclosed a significant main effect of session [F(1,33) = 7.47, p = .01, ηp² = .185] and a significant Group × Session interaction [F(1,33) = 10.85, p = .002, ηp² = .247]. The Group effect was not significant [F(1,33) = .41, p = .525, ηp = .012]. Post hoc comparisons indicated that, in the SD group, EBR increased in the morning compared with the evening (p < .001) session. In the RS group, EBR did not differ between evening and morning sessions (p < .979). No other comparison reached statistical significance (all p-values >.149).

The Pearson correlation coefficient between EBR in the evening and morning sessions in the RS group was highly significant (r = 0.903, p < .001). This correlation was not significant in the SD group (r = 0.365, p = .137). Correlation coefficients were significantly different between the RS and SD groups (p = .007).

Figure 4. Task-goal switching accuracy in the cued match-to-sample task by session (evening, morning) and trials (repeat, switch) for RS and SD groups; RS = regular sleep group; SD = sleep deprivation group. The accuracy switch costs are the difference between switch and repeat trials. **p < .01; *p < .05. and switch-cost scores for both groups, both sessions, and both CSI durations. In the present study, SD resulted in the reverse effects of napping, supporting the hypothesis of a relationship between sleep-related restorative processes and task-goal switching performance. Task-goal activation and maintenance are key features in most theoretical frameworks of cognitive control. Therefore, task-goal switching alterations observed after SD suggest that failure to adjust or maintain the task goal could be one of the reasons for a deterioration of cognitive control after SD. Our results also extend previous research on task-rule switching in showing that both task-goal and task-rule switching can be affected by SD.

The effects of SD on task-goal switching were found on accuracy but not on response latencies. A significant Session × Group interaction was observed on latency switch costs with a pattern similar to accuracy switch costs, but post hoc tests failed to disclose any significant difference. The latency switch cost usually observed in task switching studies largely relies on the learning and rehearsal of arbitrary associations between stimuli and responses, and the preparation mainly benefits the rehearsal or the reconfiguration of S–R mappings (i.e., task-rules). The proposal that retrieving information from long-term memory plays a central role in task switching was developed in the context of the retrieval-demand hypothesis. The authors observed that preparatory effects on switch costs and the retrieval-demands were eliminated when relevant task rules were directly provided by the task cues. They also suggested that episodic retrieval might be sufficient to explain the endogenous component of task switching. According to them, it would be impossible to represent more than one task rule in WM. Consequently, after a switch, the next task rule has to be retrieved from long-term memory. They also suggested that in some cases the failure to prepare requires retrieving S–R mappings when the targets are displayed, thus leading to a residual switch cost. This proposal was supported by the fact that participants can only partially prepare, maybe for one S–R association at a time. In line with these elements, we propose that the latency switch cost is mainly affected by task-rule retrieval in episodic memory because these task rules are encoded in long-term memory and their retrieval is predominantly a time-consuming process affecting latency switch cost. In contrast, as evidenced by this experiment and previous work from our team, the accuracy switch cost appears to be more related to task-goal switching. This is presumably due to the fact that it involves an online maintenance and adaptation of the goal in WM, and less long-term memory retrieval. Failure to maintain or adjust the goal would therefore be characterized by errors and an accuracy switch-cost. The state-instability hypothesis posits that SD induces instability in the capacity to maintain attention and alertness due to the growing influence of sleep initiating mechanisms. A major component of state instability might be task-set instability. The task sets and task-goals can be subject to temporary breakdowns, an effect actually close to the notion of goal neglect. However, the notion of task-set instability is more restricted than the notion of state instability and allows clearer predictions. In particular, it can be predicted that the consequences of SD will be stronger with additional conditions promoting task-set instability, like in a task-goal switching paradigm. Indeed, shifting between tasks by definition involves a temporary task-set instability. Consequently, task-set instability after SD should be stronger in switch than in repeat trials, a prediction supported by our data.

It is well known that insufficient sleep leads to a general slowing of response speed and increased variability in performance, particularly for simple measures of alertness and vigilance. Accordingly, we evidenced SD-related changes in subjective and objective measures of sleepiness and fatigue (including alertness and vigilance). RS and SD groups exhibited similar levels in the evening, but differed significantly in the morning, the SD group being sleepier, more fatigued, less alert, and vigilant. In addition, spontaneous EBR were higher after SD. These results are in line with previous findings. However, the increase in EBR was not significantly correlated with modulation of subjective and objective markers of sleepiness or vigilance, indicating that SD-related processes causing EBR increase might differ from those affecting alertness and vigilance.

Task switching is one of the cognitive control components that has been most convincingly associated with spontaneous EBR. In this study, we found a negative association between EBR and accuracy switch costs. This association was significant at long CSI, indicating that preparation processes associated with goal adaptation and goal maintenance (proactive control) are associated with EBR and, putatively, with striatal dopamine. Indeed, in previous research, increased EBR was also associated with increased cognitive flexibility and lower switch costs. It was concluded that higher dopamine activity favors an easier disengagement from the previous task. Our results are in line with this proposal. However, the EBR increase observed after SD was not significantly associated with task-goal switching impairment, suggesting that different SD-related processes affect spontaneous EBR and cognitive flexibility. This result is compatible with previous works that have questioned the plausibility of a dopamine increase after SD. Therefore, if the increase in EBR observed after SD is not due to dopamine increase, it should not be strongly associated with a task-goal switching modulation after SD, which is the case in the present study. Our results, therefore, support the idea that EBR increase after SD is not or only partially related to a dopamine increase or cognitive flexibility impairment.

Previous studies have shown that vigilance is much more affected by SD than executive functions, and some studies have failed to disclose a specific effect of SD on executive functions. Executive functions are by essence multidimensional, and operate on and through other cognitive processes. Therefore, any cognitive task recruiting executive functions will recruit other, more basic, processes as well, a phenomenon known as the task impurity problem. It cannot be excluded that low scores previously observed on executive function tasks after SD were due to deficits in nonexecutive components of task performance, like alertness or vigilance, more than deficits in executive functioning per se. Controlling for nonexecutive components in executive tasks can be achieved using control conditions and composite scores such as switch costs, SSRT, or WM updating score. In the present study, WM updating measures were not affected by SD, in agreement with prior studies disclosing null or small effects of SD in a N-back task. On the other hand, SD exerted an impact on response inhibition in the Stop Signal task, which is in agreement with prior findings.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary material is available at SLEEP online. 5. Kiesel A, Steinhauser M, Wendt M, et al. Control and interference in task switching–a review. Psychol Bull. 2010; 136(5): 849–874.
6. Vandierendonck A, Liefooghe B, Verbruggen F. Task switching: interplay of reconfiguration and interference control. Psychol Bull. 2010; 136(4): 601–626.
7. Jersild AT. Mental set and shift. Archives of Psychology. 1927; 14(89): 1–81.
8. Spector A, Biederman I. Mental set and mental shift revisited. Am J Psychol. 1976; 89(4): 669–679.
9. De Baene W, Albers AM, Brass M. The what and how components of cognitive control. Neuroimage. 2012; 63(1): 203–211.
10. Rubinstein JS, Meyer DE, Evans JE. Executive control of cognitive processes in task switching. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform. 2001; 27(4): 763–797.
11. Ravizza SM, Carter CS. Shifting set about task switching: behavioral and neural evidence for distinct forms of cognitive flexibility. Neuropsychologia. 2008; 46(12): 2924–2935.
12. Hakun JG, Ravizza SM. Cognitive control: preparation of task switching components. Brain Res. 2012; 1451: 53–64.
13. Dreisbach G, Goschke T, Haider H. The role of task rules and stimulus-response mappings in the task switching paradigm. Psychol Res. 2007; 71(4): 383–392.
14. Logan GD, Schneider DW. Interpreting instructional cues in task switching procedures: the role of mediator retrieval. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn. 2006; 32(2): 347–363.
15. Logan GD, Schneider DW. Priming or executive control? Associative priming of cue encoding increases “switch costs” in the explicit task-cuing procedure. Mem Cognit. 2006; 34(6): 1250–1259.
16. De Baene W, Brass M. Dissociating strategy-dependent and independent components in task preparation. Neuropsychologia. 2014; 62: 331–340.
17. Ruge H, Jamadar S, Zimmermann U, Karayanidis F. The many faces of preparatory control in task switching: reviewing a decade of fMRI research. Hum Brain Mapp. 2013; 34(1): 12–35.
18. von Bastian CC, Druey MD. Shifting between mental sets: An individual differences approach to commonalities and differences of task switching components. J Exp Psychol Gen. 2017; 146(9): 1266–1285.
19. Chee MW, Choo WC. Functional imaging of working memory after 24 hr of total sleep deprivation. J Neurosci. 2004; 24(19): 4560–4567.
20. Doran SM, Van Dongen HP, Dinges DF. Sustained attention performance during sleep deprivation: evidence of state instability. Arch Ital Biol. 2001; 139(3): 253–267.
21. Durmer JS, Dinges DF. Neurocognitive consequences of sleep deprivation. Semin Neurol. 2005; 25(1): 117–129.
22. Killgore WD. Effects of sleep deprivation on cognition. Prog Brain Res. 2010; 185: 105–129.
23. Lim J, Dinges DF. Sleep deprivation and vigilant attention. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008; 1129(1): 305–322.
24. Bratzke D, Rolke B, Steinborn MB, Ulrich R. The effect of 40 h constant wakefulness on task-switching efficiency. J Sleep Res. 2009; 18(2): 167–172.
25. Couyoumdjian A, Sdoia S, Tempesta D, et al. The effects of sleep and sleep deprivation on task-switching performance. J Sleep Res. 2010; 19(1 Pt 1): 64–70.
26. Heuer H, Kleinsorge T, Klein W, Kohlisch O. Total sleep deprivation increases the costs of shifting between simple cognitive tasks. Acta Psychol (Amst). 2004; 117(1): 29–64.
27. Jennings JR, Monk TH, van der Molen MW. Sleep deprivation influences some but not all processes of supervisory attention. Psychol Sci. 2003; 14(5): 473–479.
28. O’Reilly RC. Biologically based computational models of high-level cognition. Science. 2006; 314(5796): 91–94.
29. O’Reilly RC, Frank MJ. Making working memory work: a computational model of learning in the prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia. Neural Comput. 2006; 18(2): 283–328.
30. Basner M, Rao H, Goel N, Dinges DF. Sleep deprivation and neurobehavioral dynamics. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2013; 23(5): 854–863.
31. Chee MW, Chuah LY. Functional neuroimaging insights into how sleep and sleep deprivation affect memory and cognition. Curr Opin Neurol. 2008; 21(4): 417–423.
32. Slama H, Deliens G, Schmitz R, Peigneux P, Leproult R. Afternoon nap and bright light exposure improve cognitive flexibility post lunch. PLoS One. 2015; 10(5): e0125359.
33. Dreisbach G, Müller J, Goschke T, et al. Dopamine and cognitive control: the influence of spontaneous eyeblink rate and dopamine gene polymorphisms on perseveration and distractibility. Behav Neurosci. 2005; 119(2): 483–490.
34. Slagter HA, Georgopoulou K, Frank MJ. Spontaneous eye blink rate predicts learning from negative, but not positive, outcomes. Neuropsychologia. 2015; 71: 126–132.
35. Müller J, Dreisbach G, Brocke B, Lesch KP, Strobel A, Goschke T. Dopamine and cognitive control: the influence of spontaneous eyeblink rate, DRD4 exon III polymorphism and gender on flexibility in set-shifting. Brain Res. 2007; 1131(1): 155–162.
36. Tharp IJ, Pickering AD. Individual differences in cognitive flexibility: the influence of spontaneous eyeblink rate, trait psychoticism and working memory on attentional set-shifting. Brain Cogn. 2011; 75(2): 119–125.
37. Jongkees BJ, Colzato LS. Spontaneous eye blink rate as predictor of dopamine-related cognitive function-A review. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2016; 71: 58–82.
38. Barbato G, De Padova V, Paolillo AR, Arpaia L, Russo E, Ficca G. Increased spontaneous eye blink rate following prolonged wakefulness. Physiol Behav. 2007; 90(1): 151–154.
39. Barbato G, Ficca G, Beatrice M, Casiello M, Muscettola G, Rinaldi F. Effects of sleep deprivation on spontaneous eye blink rate and alpha EEG power. Biol Psychiatry. 1995; 38(5): 340–341.
40. Caffier PP, Erdmann U, Ullsperger P. The spontaneous eye-blink as sleepiness indicator in patients with obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome-a pilot study. Sleep Med. 2005; 6(2): 155–162.
41. Bohne A, Savage CR, Deckersbach T, et al. Visuospatial abilities, memory, and executive functioning in trichotillomania and obsessive-compulsive disorder. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2005; 27(4): 385–399.
42. Volkow ND, Tomasi D, Wang GJ, et al. Evidence that sleep deprivation downregulates dopamine D2R in ventral striatum in the human brain. J Neurosci. 2012; 32(19): 6711–6717.
43. Miyake A, Friedman NP, Emerson MJ, Witzki AH, Howerter A, Wager TD. The unity and diversity of executive functions and their contributions to complex “Frontal Lobe” tasks: a latent variable analysis. Cogn Psychol. 2000; 41(1): 49–100.
44. Beck AT, Steer RA, Garbin MG. Psychometric properties of Beck Depression Inventory: twenty-five years of evaluation. Clin Psychol Rev. 1988; 8(1): 77–100. 12    |   SLEEPJ, 2018, Vol. 41, No. 2

| Reference Number | Authors | Title | Journal | Year | Volume | Issue | Pages |
|------------------|---------|-------|---------|------|--------|-------|-------|
| 45 | Horne JA, Ostberg O | A self-assessment questionnaire to determine morningness-eveningness in human circadian rhythms | Int J Chronobiol | 1976 | 4 | 2 | 97–110 |
| 46 | Krupp LB, LaRocca NG, Muir-Nash J, Steinberg AD | The fatigue severity scale. Application to patients with multiple sclerosis and systemic lupus erythematosus | Arch Neurol | 1989 | 46 | 10 | 1121–1123 |
| 47 | Ellis BW, Johns MW, Lancaster R, Raptopoulos P, Angelopoulos N, Priest RG | The St. Mary’s Hospital sleep questionnaire: a study of reliability | Sleep | 1981 | 4 | 1 | 93–97 |
| 48 | Akerstedt T, Gillberg M | Subjective and objective sleepiness in the active individual | Int J Neurosci | 1990 | 52 | 1-2 | 29–37 |
| 49 | Lee KA, Hicks G, Nino-Murcia G | Validity and reliability of a scale to assess fatigue | Psychiatry Res | 1991 | 36 | 3 | 291–298 |
| 50 | Dinges DI, Powell JW | Microcomputer analysis of performance on a portable, simple visual RT task sustained operations | Behav Res Methods Instrum Comput | 1985 | 17 | 6 | 652–655 |
| 51 | Schmidt C, Collette F, Leclercq Y, et al. | Homeostatic sleep pressure and responses to sustained attention in the suprachiasmatic area | Science | 2009 | 324 | 5926 | 516–519 |
| 52 | van Zomeren AH, Brouwer WH | Clinical Neuropsychology of Attention | Oxford: Oxford University Press | 1994 |  |  |  |
| 53 | Fiehmig HC, Steinborn M, Langner R, Scholz A, Westhoff K | Assessing intraindividual variability in sustained attention: reliability, relation to speed and accuracy, and practice effects | Psychol Sci | 2007 | 49 | 2 | 132–149 |
| 54 | Chermahini SA, Hommel B | The (b)link between creativity and dopamine: spontaneous eye blink rates predict and dissociate divergent and convergent thinking | Cognition | 2010 | 115 | 3 | 458–465 |
| 55 | Zhang T, Mou D, Wang C, et al. | Dopamine and executive function: Increased spontaneous eye blink rates correlate with better set-shifting and inhibition, but poorer updating | Int J Psychophysiol | 2015 | 96 | 3 | 155–161 |
| 56 | Owen AM, McMillan KM, Laird AR, Bullmore E | N-back working memory paradigm: a meta-analysis of normative functional neuroimaging studies | Hum Brain Mapp | 2005 | 25 | 1 | 46–59 |
| 57 | Massat I, Slama H, Kavec M, et al. | Working memory-related functional brain patterns in never medicated children with ADHD | PLoS One | 2012 | 7 | 11 | e49392 |
| 58 | Massat I, Slama H, Villemonteix T, et al. | Hyperactivity in motor response inhibition networks in unmedicated children with attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder | World J Biol Psychiatry | 2016 | 19 | 2 | 101–111 |
| 59 | Rubia K, Smith AB, Brammer MJ, Toone B, Taylor E | Abnormal brain activation during inhibition and error detection in medication-naive adolescents with ADHD | Am J Psychiatry | 2005 | 162 | 6 | 1067–1075 |
| 60 | Cohen JD, MacWhinney B, Flatt M, Provost J | PsyScope: a new graphic interactive environment for designing psychology experiments | Behav Res Methods Instrum Comput | 1993 | 25 | 2 | 257–271 |
| 61 | International School of Advanced Studies (SISSA/ISAS) | PsyScope X project (version 77 build) [computer software] |  |  |  |  |  |
| 62 | Rosner B | Percentage points for a generalized ESD many-outlier procedure | Technometrics | 1983 | 25 | 2 | 165–172 |
| 63 | Cole RJ, Kripke DF, Gruen W, Mullaney DJ, Gillin JC | Automatic sleep/wake identification from wrist activity | Sleep | 1992 | 15 | 5 | 461–469 |
| 64 | JASP Team | JASP (Version 0.8.5) [Computer software] |  |  |  |  |  |
| 65 | Lien MC, Ruthruff E, Remington RW, Johnston JC | On the limits of advance preparation for a task switch: do people prepare all the task some of the time or some of the task all the time? | J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform | 2005 | 31 | 2 | 299–315 |
| 66 | Mayr U, Kliegl R | Task-set switching and long-term memory retrieval | J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn | 2000 | 26 | 5 | 1124–1140 |
| 67 | De Jong R, Berendsen E, Cools R | Goal neglect and inhibitory limitations: dissociable causes of interference effects in conflict situations | Acta Psychol (Amst) | 1999 | 101 | 2-3 | 379–394 |
| 68 | Duncan J, Emslie H, Williams P, Johnson R, Freer C | Intelligence and the frontal lobe: the organization of goal-directed behavior | Cogn Psychol | 1996 | 30 | 3 | 257–303 |
| 69 | Killgore WD, McBride SA, Killgore DB, Balkin TJ | The effects of caffeine, dextroamphetamine, and modafinil on humor appreciation during sleep deprivation | Sleep | 2006 | 29 | 6 | 841–847 |
| 70 | McIntire LK, McKinley RA, Goodyear C, McIntire JP | Detection of vigilance performance using eye blinks | Appl Ergon | 2014 | 45 | 2 | 354–362 |
| 71 | Lim J, Dinges DF | A meta-analysis of the impact of short-term sleep deprivation on cognitive variables | Psychol Bull | 2010 | 136 | 3 | 375–389 |
| 72 | Tucker AM, Whitney P, Belenky G, Hinson JM, Van Dongen HP | Effects of sleep deprivation on dissociated components of executive functioning | Sleep | 2010 | 33 | 1 | 47–57 |
| 73 | Phillips LH | Do ‘frontal tests’ measure executive functions? Issues of assessment and evidence from fluency tests | In: Rabbitt P, ed. Methodology of Frontal and Executive Function | Hove: Psychology Press | 1997 |  | 191–213 |
| 74 | Miyata S, Noda A, Ozaki N, et al. | Insufficient sleep impairs driving performance and cognitive function | Neurosci Lett | 2010 | 469 | 2 | 229–233 |
| 75 | Teran-Perez G, Ruiz-Contreras AE, Gonzalez-Robles RO, et al. | Sleep deprivation affects working memory in low but not in high complexity for the N-back test | Neurosci Med | 2012 | 3 | 4 | 380–386 |
| 76 | Lo JC, Groeger JA, Santhi N, et al. | Effects of partial and acute total sleep deprivation on performance across cognitive domains, individuals and circadian phase | PLoS One | 2012 | 7 | 9 | e45987 |
| 77 | Acheson A, Richards JB, de Wit H | Effects of sleep deprivation on impulsive behaviors in men and women | Physiol Behav | 2007 | 91 | 5 | 579–587 |
| 78 | Chuah YM, Venkatraman V, Dinges DF, Chee MW | The neural basis of interindividual variability in inhibitory efficiency after sleep deprivation | J Neurosci | 2006 | 26 | 27 | 7156–7162 |
| 79 | Oh J, Han M, Peterson BS, Jeong J | Spontaneous eyeblinks are correlated with responses during the Stroop task | PLoS One | 2012 | 7 | 4 | e34871 |
| 80 | Hopstaken JF, van der Linden D, Bakker AB, Kompier MA | A multifaceted investigation of the link between mental fatigue and task disengagement | Psychophysiology | 2015 | 52 | 3 | 305–315 | 