# Short sleep duration is associated with inadequate hydration: cross-cultural evidence from US and Chinese adults

## Abstract

**Study Objectives:** Short and long sleep durations are linked to reduced kidney function, but little research has examined how sleep is associated with hydration status. Our aim was to assess the relationship between sleep duration and urinary hydration biomarkers among adults in a cross-cultural context.

**Methods:** Three samples of adults aged ≥20 years were analyzed: 2007–2008 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES; n = 4680), 2009–2012 NHANES (n = 9559), and 2012 cross-sectional wave of the Chinese Kailuan Study (n = 11903), excluding pregnant women and adults with failing kidneys. We estimated multiple linear regression models between self-reported usual night-time sleep duration (<6, 6, 7, 8 (reference), and ≥9 hr/day) and urine specific gravity (Usg) and urine osmolality (Uosm) as continuous variables and logistic regression models dichotomized as inadequate hydration (>1.020 g/mL; >831 mOsm/kg). In primary analyses, we estimated models excluding diabetes and diuretic medications for healthier subpopulations (NHANES, n = 11353; Kailuan, n = 8766).

**Results:** In the healthier NHANES subset, 6 hr was associated with significantly higher Usg and odds of inadequate hydration (adjusted OR: 1.59, 95% CI: 1.25, 2.03) compared with 8 hr. Regression results were mixed using Uosm, but in the same direction as Usg. Among Chinese adults, short sleep duration (<6 and 6 hr) was associated with Usg and higher likelihood of inadequate hydration (6 hr adjusted OR: 1.42, 95% CI: 1.26, 1.60). No consistent association was found with sleeping ≥9 hr.

**Conclusions:** Short sleep duration was associated with higher odds of inadequate hydration in US and Chinese adults relative to sleeping 8 hr.

## Statement of Significance

Although sleep duration has been associated with kidney function, few studies have examined how sleep is associated with hydration status. Disrupting the late sleep period may increase risk of dehydration and subsequently lead to acute kidney injury. This study, using cross-sectional data on adults from a US nationally representative survey and a large Chinese cohort, finds that short sleep duration (6 hr), compared with 8 hr of sleep, was associated with higher odds of inadequate hydration using urinary biomarkers. Longitudinal and experimental research is needed to further examine physiological feedback loops, including the role of vasopressin release during sleep, and recovery processes linking sleep duration and hydration status. Short sleep was associated with inadequate hydration in a cross-cultural context.

**Key words:** sleep; dehydration; epidemiology; nutrition; public health ## Introduction
Sleep duration has been associated with myriad health outcomes, including cardiovascular disease, obesity, diabetes, and chronic kidney disease. However, a key aspect of population health, which has received less attention, is how sleep relates to actual hydration status for adults in the general population. Proper hydration is critical to physiological functioning and health. The short-term health consequences of body water deficit, or inadequate hydration, are headaches, fatigue, irritability, dry mouth, visual acuity, and in severe cases, loss of motor function and death. Therefore, identifying biological and behavioral aspects of daily life which are modifiable and related to hydration status may help improve general well-being and reduce risk of chronic conditions associated with dehydration, like urolithiasis (kidney stones) and urinary tract infections.

Hydration status is part of a tightly linked and regulated hormonal system of renin–angiotensin–aldosterone, which regulates urine concentration and body water conservation. Vasopressin is released in response to hydration status, but is also part of a circadian rhythm. Vasopressin increases in the late sleep period to help avoid dehydration. Therefore, missing this sleep period through short sleep may affect vasopressin release and disrupt body water homeostasis. Long sleep may be associated with worse hydration through changes to vasopressin release as well as higher water losses from respiration and longer periods of water intake restriction. Previous research has indicated that among those who sleep for short (<7 hr) and long periods of time (>9 hr) there is disruption in many homeostatic systems that are intertwined with hydration, including insulin sensitivity, hunger/satiety endocrine–signaling systems, cardiovascular function, and kidney function. It is therefore possible that short and long sleep may consequently negatively affect hydration status as well.

A significant gap exists in the literature identifying how sleep and hydration status are related. One recent study evaluated the effect of controlled dehydration compared with euhydration on sleep quality and sleep quantity in young, healthy adults. This study did not find that mild dehydration through body water loss affected either sleep duration or quality. However, this study examined only the direction of mild dehydration effects on sleep and is limited by small sample size. At a population level, it is unclear how sleep may be directly associated with hydration status outside of some common upstream factors, particularly across the lifespan. Moreover, information related to sleep is increasingly important in a cross-cultural context as many social/cultural, environmental, and political factors surrounding access to clean water may increase stress and modify both hydration status and sleep. These factors could serve as confounders to understanding the relationship in any one study site.

Therefore, the objective of this paper is to examine how reported usual night-time sleep duration is associated with urinary measures of hydration status in a nationally representative sample of US adults and a large cohort of Chinese adults. We hypothesize that short and long duration of sleep will be associated with more concentrated urine and higher probability of inadequate hydration across populations. We test this using two biomarkers of hydration status, urine specific gravity.

## Main dependent variable: hydration status
### Urine specific gravity
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. In 2007–2008, adults provided urine samples in the MEC. These samples were measured for urine specific gravity, or the density of urine relative to water, using a digital hand-held refractometer (ATAGO PAL-10S), with automatic temperature compensation. Usg is commonly used for laboratory and field measurements of hydration status and urine concentration. vary between 1.000 and 1.040              g/mL with values >1.020            g/mL            Alcohol, caffeine, and water intakes were derived from the
representing inadequate hydration.                                                  in-person 24 hr dietary recall using the Automated Multiple Pass
Method (AMPM) in the MEC. The AMPM recall method minimizes
The Kailuan Study.         A single random midstream morning urine                       bias by improving respondent recall of foods and beverages
sample was collected from each participant during the interview                          consumed       in  the   previous     24    hr  period    from    midnight      to
in   2012.    Usg   was     assessed     using    instrument      colorimetric           midnight through standardized probes. Caffeine intake was
method (a reagent strip method, also called the dry chemistry                            dichotomized at 400 mg (< or ≥400 mg) because consumption
test method) within 2 hr of urine sample collection (H12-MA                         above that level is associated with higher risk of dehydration.
test strips,   Changchun        Dirui   Medical     Technology       Co.,   Ltd.
Changchun, China). All urine samples were measured using a                                   The   Global     Physical   Activity    Questionnaire       was    used    to
urine analyzer (N-600, Dirui, Changchun, China) at the central                           construct the physical activity variable. During the home
laboratory of the Kailuan general hospital. The results of Usg                           interview, participants were asked, using the CAPI system, to
were rounded to 0.005 g/mL for a minimum of 1.000 g/mL and a                             list the total time they spent in the previous week in moderate
maximum of 1.030 g/mL.                                                                   and vigorous activities from biking or walking, work, and leisure
activities. Physical activity was dichotomized based on whether
Urine osmolality                                                                         the individual met national guidelines of 150 min or more per
In 2009–2012, adults in NHANES provided spot urine samples                               week of moderate or vigorous physical activity.
in   the   MEC.     Urine    osmolality     (Uosm),     which     is  the   total            To   test  for   diabetes,   blood    specimens       were    collected    in
concentration of dissolved particles per kg of water in urine, was                       the MEC for all participants and samples were analyzed for
determined by freezing point depression osmometry in the MEC                             hemoglobin Ac (HbA1C ) in the Fairview Medical Center Laboratory.
lab, calculated as milliosmoles per kilogram (mOsm/kg). Uosm                             at the University of Minnesota. Adults with HbA 1C values of 6.5%
is highly correlated with Usg and is a reliable urinary biomarker                        or higher or who reported that a doctor ever told them they
of daily hydration status. Uosm values vary between 50                              and 1200 mOsm/kg with values >831 mOsm/kg representing                                       inadequate hydration.
Medication      information       (if they    had    taken    prescription
medications in the last 30 days) was obtained through self-report
by showing the container to the interviewer. The prescriptions
were coded by NCHS. The codes for any diuretic medication (e.g.
loop, thiazide, and potassium-sparing) were identified and used
to exclude participants in some of the analyses as they affect
urine concentration.
Main independent variable: sleep duration
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
Participants were asked about their sleeping habits in their                             home, using the Computer-Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI) system, as part of the survey participant household interview. To estimate the usual amount of sleep participants obtained on a nightly basis, they were asked “How much sleep do you usually get at night on weekdays or workdays?” This question did not take into account daytime naps and responses were in integer hour increments.
The Kailuan Study
Participants were asked to report usual total hours of actual                            sleep during the night to the half hour and also did not take into                       account daytime naps.
Based on previous research that has indicated a U-shaped
pattern between hours of sleep and health outcomes where both
short sleep and long sleep were seen as potential risk factors,                      we categorized sleep based on the latest recommendations at                              less than 6 hr of sleep, 6, 7, 8, and 9 hr or more hours of sleep. We treated 8 hr of sleep as the reference category since this is often viewed as an ideal sleep duration by sleep experts.
Covariates
We adjusted for several known confounders in this analysis                               depending on data availability by site. In NHANES, sex (male                             and female), race/Hispanic origin (non-Hispanic white, non-                              Hispanic black, Hispanic, and other [including all non-Hispanic                          individuals reporting more than one race]), BMI (kg/m2), alcohol                         intake (g), caffeine intake (mg), total water intake (ml), physical                      activity (minutes), time of the exam (morning, afternoon, or                             evening), and diabetes status were included as covariates in the                             NHANES analysis to control for potential confounding.                             Descriptive
statistics characterizing the NHANES samples were estimated
with and without exclusions for adults with diabetes and those
who reported taking a diuretic prescription medication in the
past 30 days to estimate the relationship between sleep and
hydration status for the full samples and a healthier subset.
Fractional    polynomial       plots   were    created    between      sleep
hours as a continuous variable on Usg and Uosm, to allow for | Sample characteristics of nonpregnant adults without kidney failure, with and without exclusions for diabetes and taking diuretic medications, from the US NHANES and the Chinese Kailuan Study | NHANES*  | NHANES†  | NHANES*  | NHANES†  | Kailuan*  | Kailuan†  |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|
| 2007–2008                                                                                                                                              | 2007–2008 | 2009–2012 | 2009–2012 | 2012      | 2012      |
| Mean or % (SE)                                                                                                                                       | Mean or % (SE) | Mean or % (SE) | Mean or % (SE) | Mean or % (SD) | Mean or % (SD) |
| n‡                                                                                                                                                     | 4680      | 3689      | 9599      | 7664      | 11 903    | 8766      |
| Age (yr)                                                                                                                                              | 46.4 (0.4) | 44.1 (0.5) | 47.1 (0.5) | 44.7 (0.5) | 54.3 (11.2) | 52.8 (11.1) |
| Sex (% male)                                                                                                                                         | 51.9 (0.9) | 51.6 (0.9) | 49.9 (0.6) | 49.4 (0.6) | 83.0 (0.4) | 82.7 (0.4) |
| Race/Hispanic origin§                                                                                                                                 |           |           |           |           |           |           |
| NH white (%)                                                                                                                                         | 69.7 (3.7) | 70.4 (3.5) | 68.2 (2.6) | 69.0 (2.6) | Han       | Han       |
| NH black (%)                                                                                                                                         | 11.6 (2.1) | 10.6 (1.9) | 11.1 (1.2) | 10.3 (1.1) |           |           |
| Hispanic (%)                                                                                                                                         | 13.3 (2.0) | 13.6 (2.1) | 13.8 (1.9) | 13.9 (1.9) |           |           |
| Height (cm)                                                                                                                                          | 168.9 (0.3) | 169.2 (0.3) | 169.1 (0.2) | 169.4 (0.2) | 169.3 (6.6) | 169.3 (6.6) |
| BMI (kg/m2)                                                                                                                                          | 28.6 (0.2) | 27.9 (0.2) | 28.7 (0.1) | 28.0 (0.1) | 25.1 (3.3) | 24.7 (3.2) |
| Weight (kg)                                                                                                                                          | 81.8 (0.6) | 80.4 (0.6) | 82.3 (0.3) | 80.5 (0.3) | 71.9 (11.2) | 71.0 (11.0) |
| Urine specific gravity (g/mL)                                                                                                                        | 1.0165 (0.0002) | 1.0164 (0.0003) | –         | –         | 1.022 (0.006) | 1.022 (0.006) |
| Urine osmolality (mOsm/kg)                                                                                                                           | –         | –         | 613.6 (5.9) | 617.6 (6.5) | –         | –         |
| Inadequate hydration|| (%)                                                                                                                            | 31.9 (1.3) | 32.1 (1.4) | 24.9 (0.8) | 26.1 (0.8) | 52.7 (5.0) | 52.2 (5.0) |
| Sleep (hr)                                                                                                                                           | 6.8 (0.05) | 6.8 (0.05) | 6.9 (0.02) | 6.9 (0.02) | 7.1 (1.3) | 7.1 (1.2) |
| Sleep category                                                                                                                                       |           |           |           |           |           |           |
| <6 hr                                                                                                                                                 | 14.9 (1.3) | 14.5 (1.5) | 12.9 (0.5) | 12.5 (0.6) | 11.6 (3.2) | 10.5 (3.1) |
| 6 hr                                                                                                                                                  | 23.1 (0.8) | 22.9 (0.8) | 23.9 (0.5) | 23.9 (0.9) | 19.8 (4.0) | 20.4 (4.0) |
| 7 hr                                                                                                                                                  | 29.8 (1.1) | 30.7 (1.2) | 28.9 (0.8) | 29.9 (0.9) | 16.5 (3.7) | 16.8 (3.7) |
| 8 hr                                                                                                                                                  | 26.0 (1.0) | 26.0 (1.0) | 27.4 (0.8) | 27.1 (0.8) | 51.1 (5.0) | 51.2 (5.0) |
| ≥9 hr                                                                                                                                                 | 6.3 (0.5)  | 5.9 (0.6)  | 6.8 (0.4)  | 6.5 (0.4)  | 1.1 (1.0)  | 1.1 (1.0)  |
| Physical activity¶                                                                                                                                  | 23.8 (1.5) | 25.3 (1.6) | 19.8 (0.7) | 21.6 (0.8) | 14.9 (35.6) | 14.1 (34.8) |
| (%, ≥150min/week)                                                                                                                                   |           |           |           |           |           |           |
| Time of exam                                                                                                                                         |           |           |           |           |           |           |
| Morning                                                                                                                                              | 44.6 (1.6) | 45.0 (1.8) | 45.2 (1.0) | 44.0 (1.1) | 9 am      | 9 am      |
| Noon                                                                                                                                                 | 32.8 (1.6) | 31.9 (1.6) | 33.9 (0.8) | 33.8 (0.9) | –         | –         |
| Afternoon                                                                                                                                           | 22.6 (1.6) | 23.2 (1.7) | 20.9 (0.7) | 22.2 (7.6) | –         | –         |
| Total water intake (mL/day)                                                                                                                         | 3028 (59)  | 3051 (69)  | 3130 (39)  | 3153 (38)  | –         | –         |
| Caffeine intake (% ≥ 400 mg/day)                                                                                                                    | 12.3 (1.1) | 12.7 (1.1) | 11.3 (0.8) | 11.3 (0.9) | –         | –         |
| Alcohol intake (g/day)                                                                                                                              | 10.4 (0.9) | 11.2 (1.0) | 12.0 (0.6) | 13.0 (0.6) | –         | –         |
| Diabetes (%)                                                                                                                                         | 10.3 (0.6) | –         | 10.5 (0.4) | –         | 11.9 (32.4) | –         |

*Not excluding adults with diabetes or diuretic use.
† Excluding adults with diabetes, diuretic use, and weak/failing kidneys.
‡ Unweighted sample size.
§ Race/Hispanic origin “other” category is included in total sample, but is not shown.
||Defined as >831 mOsm/kg for urine osmolality and >1.020 g/ml for Usg.
¶Defined using a single question related to physical activity in Kailuan Chinese cohort: % responding they are highly active.

a curvilinear relationship to emerge. Multiple linear regression models were used to test the association between sleep duration category and Usg and Uosm controlling for confounders with and without additional exclusions for both NHANES and the Kailuan Study. We used logistic regression models to examine the odds of inadequate hydration with elevated Usg (>1.020 g/mL) and elevated Uosm (>831 mOsm/kg). We tested for interactions between sleep category and race/ethnicity, sex, weight status, age, and time of the exam and none were significant in linear regressions. Therefore, no interactions were included in the final models presented. We conducted three sensitivity checks. We re-estimated the associations using different sleep categories, i.e. 7 and 8 hr combined as the reference category since some recommendations cite a need of a minimum 7 hr sleep. Second, we re-estimated the analyses with a stricter inadequate hydration cut-off for Usg (>1.025 g/mL). Finally, we re-estimated models additionally adjusting for sleep disorders: (1) in the NHANES models, whether a doctor had ever told the participant they had a sleeping disorder (insomnia, sleep apnea, restless leg syndrome [RLS], or other). (2) In the Kailuan cohort, we additionally adjusted for data on insomnia and snoring, no data were collected on RLS.

Sample
In NHANES, pregnant women (2007–2008: n = 56; 2009–2012: n = 108) and adults who reported they had ever been told by a doctor they had weak or failing kidneys (2007–2008: n = 137; 2009–2012: n = 279) were excluded from all analyses leaving an analytical sample of n = 4680 and n = 9599, respectively, without missing sleep, hydration, or covariate data. In the primary analyses, we additionally excluded adults with diabetes and those currently taking diuretics (2007–2008: n = 991; 2009–2012: n = 1935). This resulted in final sample sizes of n = 3689 in 2007–2008 and n = 7664 in 2009–2012. Among the Kailuan Study, 11 905 adults in 2012 had full sleep information and Usg data. Two adults were missing alcohol Urine specific gravity (g/ml) drinking status information, yielding 11 903 adults in the main NHANES: urine osmolality analyses. In the Kailuan cohort, weak or failing kidneys were identified through proteinuria (>300 mg/dL) or eGFR<60 mL/min per 1.73 m2 (methods are described elsewhere) and additional exclusions were made based on these criteria. No pregnant women were examined in the study. In the primary analyses, we sequentially excluded 2859 adults who reported diabetes or any type of diuretic medication, and an additional 278 due to weak or failing kidneys, yielding a final sample size of 8766.

## Results
### NHANES: urine-specific gravity

Table 2. Relationship between sleep duration on urine specific gravity and odds of inadequate hydration among US adults, NHANES

In the 2007–2008 sample, using a best-fitting fractional polynomial between the continuous measure of sleep duration (hr) and Usg, a mild U-shaped relationship was observed. This suggests that mean Usg at a population level is highest for adults who reported short amounts of sleep and that the mean decreases until 8 to 9 hr of sleep where it begins to increase again.

We next examined multiple linear regression models examining the association between sleep duration and Usg with and without additional exclusions adjusted for covariates (Table 2; Models 1 and 2). Both models indicated that compared with reporting 8 hr of sleep, adults who reported 6 hr of sleep on a usual basis had significantly more concentrated urine (Model 2: Adjusted beta [B] = 0.0011, standard error [SE] = 0.0004, p = 0.013).

Multiple logistic regression models evaluating the relationship between sleep duration and inadequate hydration using the standard cutoff (>1.020 g/mL) demonstrated a similar relationship to the linear models (Table 2; Models 3 and 4). Adults who reported 6 hr of sleep had 1.59 times the odds of having elevated Usg than adults who reported 8 hr of sleep. Additionally, adults who reported 7 hr of sleep also had higher odds (OR: 1.30) than adults who reported 8 hr of sleep. Very short sleepers (<6 hr) and long sleepers (9+ hr) did not have significantly different odds of inadequate hydration, likely because of lower sample sizes in those bins.

| Sleep category | Usg†,‡ | Usg‡,§ | Inadequate hydration†,‡,|| | Inadequate hydration‡,§,|| |
|----------------|---------|---------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|
| <6 hr          | 0.0003  | 0.0001  | 1.07                        | 1.01                        |
| 6 hr           | 0.0008**| 0.0011**| 1.47***                    | 1.59***                    |
| 7 hr           | 0.0003  | 0.0003  | 1.23*                      | 1.30**                     |
| 8 hr           | Reference| Reference| 1                           | 1                           |
| ≥9 hr          | 0.0007  | 0.0009  | 1.18                        | 1.21                        |

Observations: 4680, 3689, 4680, 3689
R-squared: 0.17, 0.17
Standard errors or 95% confidence intervals in parentheses.
† Not excluding adults with diabetes or diuretic use.
‡ Adjusted for age, race/Hispanic origin, sex, BMI, total water intake, alcohol intake, high caffeine intake (>400 mg), time of exam, physical activity level > 150 minutes of moderate/vigorous activity/week.
§ Excluding adults with diabetes, diuretic use, and weak/failing kidneys.
|| Inadequate hydration is Usg > 1.020 g/mL.
¶ Unweighted sample size.

***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.1.

Figure 1. Fractional polynomial plot between sleep duration and urine specific gravity for nonpregnant US adults without kidney failure, diabetes, or taking diuretics aged ≥20 years (n = 3689), NHANES 2007–2008.

Figure 2. Fractional polynomial plot between sleep duration and urine osmolality for nonpregnant US adults without kidney failure, diabetes, or on diuretic medications, aged ≥20 years (n = 7664), NHANES 2009–2012. | Sleep category | Uosm†,‡ (Mosm/kg) | Uosm‡,§ (Mosm/kg) | Odds Ratio (95% CI) | Odds Ratio (95% CI) |
|----------------|--------------------|--------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| <6 hr          | 7.3 (13.6)         | 9.0 (15.2)         | 0.94 (0.76–1.16)     | 0.90 (0.68–1.20)     |
| 6 hr           | 18.7** (9.1)       | 22.8** (9.6)       | 1.17* (0.98–1.41)    | 1.16 (0.97–1.40)     |
| 7 hr           | −4.2 (9.7)         | −5.1 (10.9)        | 0.83* (0.67–1.01)    | 0.81* (0.66–1.00)    |
| 8 hr           | Reference          | Reference          | 1                    | 1                    |
| ≥9 hr          | 0.47 (15.6)        | 3.0 (18.3)         | 0.76 (0.49–1.16)     | 0.75 (0.50–1.15)     |
| Observations¶  | 9599               | 7664               | 9599                 | 7664                 |
| R-squared      | 0.14               | 0.14               |                      |                      |

| Sleep category | Usg†,‡ (g/mL) | Usg‡,§ (g/mL) | Odds Ratio (95% CI) | Odds Ratio (95% CI) |
|----------------|----------------|----------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| <6 hr          | 0.0006***      | 0.0006***      | 1.39*** (1.23–1.57)  | 1.45*** (1.24–1.68)  |
| 6 hr           | 0.0004***      | 0.0005***      | 1.36*** (1.23–1.50)  | 1.42*** (1.11–1.42)  |
| 7 hr           | 0.0001         | 0.0003         | 1.22*** (1.10–1.36)  | 1.25*** (1.11–1.42)  |
| 8 hr           | Reference      | Reference      | 1                    | 1                    |
| ≥9 hr          | −0.0008*       | −0.0013**      | 0.81 (0.56–1.15)     | 0.76 (0.50–1.16)     |
| Observations   | 11 903         | 8766           | 11 903               | 8766                 |
| R-squared      | 0.03           | 0.04           |                      |                      |

Standard errors or 95% confidence intervals in parentheses.
† Not excluding adults with diabetes or diuretic use.
‡ Adjusted for age, race/Hispanic origin, sex, BMI, total water intake, alcohol intake, high caffeine intake (>400 mg), time of exam, physical activity level > 150 min of moderate/vigorous activity/week.
§ Excluding adults with diabetes, diuretic use, and weak/failing kidneys.
|| Inadequate hydration is Uosm > 831 mOsm/kg.
¶ Unweighted sample size.
***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05; *p < 0.1.

In multiple linear regression, adults who reported less than 6 and 6–6.5 hr of sleep had significantly more concentrated urine than adults who reported sleeping 8–8.5 hr of sleep for the full sample and when excluding adults on diuretic medications and with diabetes. Similarly, in multiple logistic regressions, adults who reported less than 6 (aOR: 1.45, 95% CI: 1.24, 1.68), 6–6.5 (aOR: 1.42, 95% CI: 1.26, 1.60), and 7–7.5 (aOR: 1.25, 95% CI: 1.11, 1.42) hr had significantly higher odds of inadequate hydration than adults who slept 8–8.5 hr. Results between long sleep (≥9 hr) and Usg were mixed in linear and logistic models. Long sleep was associated with significantly lower Usg in linear models (B = −0.0013, SE = 0.0006; p = 0.024), whereas no association was found in the logistic regression models.

Comparison of Usg results from NHANES and the Kailuan Study

Because Usg was collected in both the NHANES and the Kailuan Study, we compared the results of the logistic regressions for inadequate hydration. Interestingly, the results are similar for both samples in comparing 6 and 7 hr, respectively, to 8 hr of sleep. However, the main difference is seen for the shortest and longest sleepers as the Kailuan Study data presented more of a dose–response-like stepwise reduction in odds of inadequate hydration with increasing sleep.

Kailuan Study: urine-specific gravity

Unlike the US NHANES data, the Chinese Kailuan data exhibited a negative linear relationship between sleep duration and Usg. Habitual sleep
(hours/day)                                                                           and Uosm variables from NHANES and the Kailuan Chinese
<6 hours                                                                          6, 7, and 8       hr with the overall samples and with healthier
subsamples, i.e. excluding adults with diabetes and those taking
6 hours                                                                         diuretic medications. The large majority of US and Chinese
adults (~80%–88%) reported between 6 and 8                     hr (inclusive) of
7 hours                                                                         sleep on a usual basis. Therefore, teasing apart the relationship
8 hours (Ref)                                                                          beyond these sleep durations may require larger sample sizes in
9+ hours                                                                          these subgroups of adults.
.5                        1            1.5        2       2.5      clearance. For example, the prevalence of sleep-
Odds ratio of inadequate hydration
related problems, including short sleep duration, was found to
NHANES          Kailuan Chinese Cohort                   be higher among adults with CKD. Additionally, each hour
Figure 4. Odds of inadequate hydration (Usg > 1.020 g/mL) by sleep duration for          less of sleep was associated with higher glomerular filtration
US (n = 3689) and Chinese (n = 8766) nonpregnant adults, without failing kidneys,        rate over 10 years of follow-up. These findings suggest that
diabetes, or on diuretic medications. Figure is built from logistic regressions          kidney health is negatively affected by short sleep duration, and
presented in Tables 2 and 4 adjusted for covariates.                                     these effects may translate into dysregulation of body water
through vasopressin release. Results of a significant association
between sleep duration and inadequate hydration presented
sleep (7–8 hr inclusive as the reference category) for NHANES                            here add to, and support, growing evidence that short sleep
(Supplementary        Tables      S1   and   S2)  and    the   Kailuan     Study         duration has implications for kidney health.
(Supplementary Table S3). Results were consistently significant                              A key physiological pathway connecting hydration status
with adults who reported 5–6 hr (inclusive) of sleep having 17%–                         and sleep relates to the circadian rhythm release of antidiuretic
32% significantly higher odds of inadequate hydration across                             hormone or vasopressin. Research in both humans and rats
the three samples using both Usg and Uosm (Supplementary                                 has found that vasopressin release increases in the late sleep
Tables S1–S3).                                                                           period, which serves to help moderate hydration status during
When a stricter cutoff for inadequate hydration was used                             sleep given that this is a period where water intake in inhibited
for Usg (>1.025 g/mL), logistic regression results were consistent                       and respiratory water loss increases. If the late sleep
for the Kailuan Study and stronger for NHANES than in the                                period is disrupted, then this suggests that individuals may not
primary analyses. In the healthier subset of NHANES, adults                              experience the increased release of vasopressin for homeostasis
who reported sleeping 6 hr had 1.94 (95% CI: 1.40, 2.69) times                           of body water which may increase vulnerability to dehydration.
the odds of being inadequately hydrated compared with adults                             getting 8 hr of sleep (full results not shown).                                              It is unclear from our data what is driving this association,
Finally,   when      re-estimating       the    NHANES       and     Kailuan         whether shorter sleep duration is affecting vasopressin release,
regression models additionally adjusting for sleep disorders,                            which affects kidney concentration of urine, or whether shorter
results were strongly consistent with the adjusted results and                           sleep    duration     is also   associated      with   other    health    factors
did not materially change.

Discussion                                                                               The results from this nationally representative US survey and                            large Chinese cohort provide evidence at the population level                            that short, but not long, sleep duration was associated with more                        concentrated urine and higher odds of inadequate hydration. We                           examined how sleep duration was associated with two urinary                              biomarkers      of  hydration      status. In    both    populations, adults             who reported sleeping 6 hr had significantly more concentrated                           urine and 16%–59% higher odds of being inadequately hydrated                             compared with adults who slept 8 hr on a regular basis at night.                         Long sleepers, those who slept 9 or more hours, did not exhibit                          worse    hydration     status    than    normal     sleepers. Although        the        adjusted betas were small for the continuous measures of Usg                             analysis, results between sleep and hydration status remained consistent (results not shown). small sample (N = 12) of healthy young males in a euhydrated state and in a dehydrated state, that sleep quality and duration did not significantly vary between the conditions. However, this study measured one night of sleep in each condition and had a small sample size. One notable finding was that the percentage of mean REM sleep decreased by 7 percentage points (35.1% ± 18.8 vs 28.1% ± 9.7) and the percentage of mean light sleep increased by 6.8 percentage points (41.2% ± 15.5 vs 48.0% ± 11.9) in the dehydrated condition compared with the euhydrated condition, though not significant likely due to the low sample size. This study did not measure vasopressin during sleep and so it is hard to know whether vasopressin differed between conditions.

Strengths
This paper has several strengths. We use two urinary markers of hydration status, which are sensitive to changes in daily hydration status, to assess this relationship on two nationally representative samples from the United States and with a large cohort of Chinese adults. Second, through additional exclusions of adults with diabetes and those taking diuretics, mostly for hypertensive medications, we examined the relationship on a healthier subpopulation and reduce confounding from these medical conditions. The results are consistent across urinary biomarkers on separate samples, across time periods, with additional exclusions, using different sleep categories, and inadequate hydration cutoff. This is the first large-scale study, to the best of our knowledge, that examines the association between sleep duration and hydration status in a cross-cultural context.

Limitations
All data are observational and from cross-sectional studies or a cross-sectional wave of a cohort study; therefore, the association results from this study should not be viewed as causal. Furthermore, it is not possible to investigate the direction of this association and it is subject to reverse-causality bias, whereby hydration status may be affecting sleep duration, although a previous report does not support this. Future studies could test this hypothesis to further untangle the direction of the association. Reported sleep is the usual amount of sleep, not necessarily the amount of sleep the participant had the previous night, which would be a more accurate measure for this relationship. Further study using direct measurement of sleep duration is warranted and could assess both the usual average amount of sleep for a time period (e.g. a week or a month) and the amount of sleep the night before measurement of hydration status. Additionally, although we have relatively large sample sizes in both populations, the vast majority of adults reported obtaining 6–8 hr of sleep, so we are unable to examine with high resolution this relationship for the extremes of the population, i.e. those who sleep less than 6 hr and those who sleep 9 or more hours per night on a regular basis. Differences in available covariate data, measurement differences, and population parameters may introduce residual confounding. The Kailuan Study was 83% male vs 50% male for NHANES and the same dietary intake data were not available. The Kailuan Study used a reagent strip method to assess Usg, which is less reliable than the refractometry method used in NHANES, and data were rounded to 0.005 g/mL versus the 0.001 g/mL precision in NHANES. Reagent strips have been found to be highly associated with Usg however (r = 0.81). Furthermore, we are limited by one urinary biomarker per sample and do not have multiple biomarkers per participant. We also do not have repeated measures of hydration status for the same individuals to assess how this relationship may manifest within an individual over time and varying hydration levels. However, the replication of this association across populations in different cultural contexts overcomes country-level confounding identified in the majority of studies. Future studies should use the same methodology across sites and examine this relationship longitudinally over the course of a week to understand baseline sleep and hydration status. Finally, we do not have information on vasopressin to examine how differences in vasopressin may potentially mediate the relationship between sleep and hydration status.

Conclusions
Short sleep duration was associated with worse hydration status at a population level for US and Chinese adults. Adults who reported sleeping 6 hr on a nightly basis had significantly more concentrated urine and higher odds of being inadequately hydrated compared with adults who reported sleeping 8 hr. Long sleepers did not have significantly greater risk of inadequate hydration. Future studies should examine this relationship experimentally to assess how variation in sleep duration and quality affects next day markers of hydration status longitudinally. Increasing sleep may have cascading biobehavioral health benefits, one of them being better hydration status, which may be protective of CKD.

Supplementary Material
Supplementary material is available at SLEEP online. | No. | Reference                                                                                     |
|-----|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 2   | LiJ, et al. Sleep and CKD in Chinese adults: a cross-sectional study. Clin J Am Soc Nephr. 2017;12(6):885–892. |
| 3   | Dashti HS, et al. Short sleep duration and dietary intake: epidemiologic evidence, mechanisms, and health implications. Adv Nutr. 2015;6(6):648–659. |
| 4   | Taheri S, et al. Short sleep duration is associated with reduced leptin, elevated ghrelin, and increased body mass index. PLoS Med. 2004;1(3):e62. |
| 5   | Ayas NT, et al. A prospective study of self-reported sleep duration and incident diabetes in women. Diabetes Care. 2003;26(2):380–384. |
| 6   | Popkin BM, et al. Water, hydration, and health. Nutr Rev. 2010;68(8):439–458. |
| 7   | Jéquier E, et al. Water as an essential nutrient: the physiological basis of hydration. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2010;64(2):115–123. |
| 8   | Armstrong LE, et al. An empirical method to determine inadequacy of dietary water. Nutrition. 2016;32(1):79–82. |
| 9   | Ganio MS, et al. Mild dehydration impairs cognitive performance and mood of men. Br J Nutr. 2011;106(10):1535–1543. |
| 10  | Grandjean AC, et al. Dehydration and cognitive performance. J Am Coll Nutr. 2007;26(Suppl 5):549S–554S. |
| 11  | Thornton SN. Thirst and hydration: physiology and consequences of dysfunction. Physiol Behav. 2010;100(1):15–21. |
| 12  | Trudel E, et al. Circadian modulation of osmoregulated firing in rat supraoptic nucleus neurones. J Neuroendocrinol. 2012;24(4):577–586. |
| 13  | Trudel E, et al. Central clock excites vasopressin neurons by waking osmosensory afferents during late sleep. Nat Neurosci. 2010;13(4):467–474. |
| 14  | Colwell CS. Preventing dehydration during sleep. Nat Neurosci. 2010;13(4):403–404. |
| 15  | Javaheri S, et al. Association of short and long sleep durations with insulin sensitivity in adolescents. J Pediatr. 2011;158(4):617–623. |
| 16  | Petrov ME, et al. Objective sleep, a novel risk factor for alterations in kidney function: the CARDIA study. Sleep Med. 2014;15(9):1140–1146. |
| 17  | Aristotelous P, et al. Effects of controlled dehydration on sleep quality and quantity: a polysomnographic study in healthy young adults. J Sleep Res. 2018; 1–7. |
| 18  | Rosinger A. Dehydration among lactating mothers in the Amazon: a neglected problem. Am J Hum Biol. 2015;27(4):576–578. |
| 19  | Gleick PH. Water, drought, climate change, and conflict in Syria. Weather Clim Soc. 2014;6(3):331–340. |
| 20  | Kruger DJ, et al. Toxic trauma: household water quality experiences predict posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms during the Flint, Michigan, water crisis. J Community Psychol. 2017;45(7):957–962. |
| 21  | National Center for Health Statistics. National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES): questionnaires, Datasets, and Related Documentation. 2015. |
| 22  | National Center for Health Statistics. National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES): MEC in-Person Dietary Interviewers Procedures Manual. 2015. |
| 23  | Li W, et al. Blood pressure trajectories and the risk of intracerebral hemorrhage and cerebral infarction: a prospective study. Hypertension. 2017;70(3):508–514. |
| 24  | Wong JC, et al. Risk factors for probable REM sleep behavior disorder: a community-based study. Neurology. 2016;86(14):1306–1312. |
| 25  | MaC, et al. Probable REM sleep behavior disorder and risk of stroke: a prospective study. Neurology. 2017;88(19):1849–1855. |
| 26  | Armstrong LE. Assessing hydration status: the elusive gold standard. J Am Coll Nutr. 2007;26(Suppl 5):575S–584S. |
| 27  | Sawka MN, et al.; American College of Sports Medicine. American college of sports medicine position stand. Exercise and fluid replacement. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2007;39(2):377–390. |
| 28  | Chadha V, et al. Measurement of urinary concentration: a critical appraisal of methodologies. Pediatr Nephrol. 2001;16(4):374–382. |
| 29  | Cheuvront SN, et al. Biological variation and diagnostic accuracy of dehydration assessment markers. Am J Clin Nutr. 2010;92(3):565–573. |
| 30  | Watson NF, et al.; Consensus Conference P. Joint consensus statement of the american academy of sleep medicine and sleep research society on the recommended amount of sleep for a healthy adult: methodology and discussion. Sleep. 2015;38(8):1161–1183. |
| 31  | Hirshkowitz M, et al. National sleep foundation’s sleep time duration recommendations: methodology and results summary. Sleep Health. 2015;1(1):40–43. |
| 32  | Killer SC, et al. No evidence of dehydration with moderate daily coffee intake: a counterbalanced cross-over study in a free-living population. PLoS One. 2014;9(1):e84154. |
| 33  | Silva AM, et al. Total body water and its compartments are not affected by ingesting a moderate dose of caffeine in healthy young adult males. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2013;38(6):626–632. |
| 34  | Stookey JD. The diuretic effects of alcohol and caffeine and total water intake misclassification. Eur J Epidemiol. 1999;15(2):181–188. |
| 35  | Eisenhofer G, et al. Effect of ethanol ingestion on plasma vasopressin and water balance in humans. Am J Physiol. 1982;242(5):R522–R527. |
| 36  | Perrier E, et al. Circadian variation and responsiveness of hydration biomarkers to changes in daily water intake. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2013;113(8):2143–2151. |
| 37  | Manz F, et al. Hydration status in the United States and Germany. Nutr Rev. 2005;63(6 Pt 2):S55–S62. |
| 38  | Moshfegh AJ, et al. The US department of agriculture automated multiple-pass method reduces bias in the collection of energy intakes. Am J Clin Nutr. 2008;88(2):324–332. |
| 39  | Armstrong T, Bull F. Development of the world health organization global physical activity questionnaire (GPAQ). J Public Health. 2006;14(2):66–70. |
| 40  | U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans. Washington, DC; 2008. |
| 41  | The International Expert Committee. International expert committee report on the role of the A1C assay in the diagnosis of diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2009;32(7):1327–1334. |
| 42  | Jin C, et al. Longitudinal change in fasting blood glucose and myocardial infarction risk in a population without diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2017;40(11):1565–1572. |
| 43  | Korn EL, et al. Predictive Margins (direct standardization). Analysis of Health Surveys. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc; 1999: 126–140. |
| 44  | Benton D, et al. Minor degree of hypohydration adversely influences cognition: a mediator analysis. Am J Clin Nutr. 2016;104(3):603–612. | 45. Armstrong LE, et al. Mild dehydration affects mood in healthy young women. J Nutr. 2012;142(2):382–388
46. Murray B. Hydration and physical performance. J Am Coll Nutr. 2007;26(Suppl 5):542S–548S
47. Chou YT, et al. Obstructive sleep apnea: a stand-alone risk factor for chronic kidney disease. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2011;26(7):2244–2250
48. Plantinga L, et al.; CDC CKD Surveillance Team. Association of sleep-related problems with CKD in the United States, 2005-2008. Am J Kidney Dis. 2011;58(4):554–564
49. Opstad PK. The hypothalamo-pituitary regulation of androgen secretion in young men after prolonged physical stress combined with energy and sleep deprivation. Acta Endocrinol (Copenh). 1992;127(3):231–236
50. Grandner MA, et al. Dietary nutrients associated with short and long sleep duration. Data from a nationally representative sample. Appetite. 2013;64:71–80
51. Abbey BM, et al. Validity of hydratrend reagent strips for the assessment of hydration status. J Strength Cond Res. 2014;28(9):2634–2639 